---
title: Successful Economic Policies? For Whom?
author: Ron Paul
date: September 7, 2010
layout: page
---

Last week, in the wake of another uptick in the official unemployment rate, the
administration continued to claim that their economic policies were working,
just not fast enough. This administration inherited an unemployment rate of
7.7% and promised a peak of no higher than 8% if their policies were followed.
Not only does the administration have a funny way of ending a war, but now they
claim their economic policies are successful. For whom, I wonder?

These policies are not working for the 9.6% of Americans who are out of work,
nor for the over16% underemployed. They are not working for nearly 3 million
Americans who have declared bankruptcy in the last two years, or the 40 million
currently on food stamps. Nearly 1 in 6 Americans depend on those and other
government anti-poverty programs such as Medicaid and unemployment benefits. As
more Americans are added to the unemployment rolls, the tax base from which to
hand out their benefits is shrinking. Still, businesses are being taxed and
regulated out of the market, adding to the problem. What solutions are put
forth? More government spending – even as each citizen’s portion of the public
debt is over $43,000 and expected to increase by $250,000 over the next 40
years.

No, this economy is not working for these people. But current economic policy
does “work” for some people. For example, it has worked out very well for
certain bankers and large corporations, who took on too much risk and got
themselves in hot water, and were declared “too big to fail” which is really a
euphemism for “friends in high places”. It works well for large, well-connected
military industrial corporations, who can always count on perpetual war and
conflict to keep them in business. It also works for those on the government’s
payroll, which is increasing as the tax base is decreasing.

So where does the government get all this money even as its most obvious stream
of revenue dries up? How can it keep spending seemingly indefinitely? Once it
steals as much from you as it can get away with through taxation, it steals
even more from you through what central bankers like to call quantitative
easing, which is more or less the same thing as counterfeiting. When the money
is no longer based on a finite quantity of something of value, like a store of
gold or silver, the amount of money in circulation is not limited by anything
but the restraint of those in control of the printing presses, in our case the
Fed and the US Treasury. When increasing pressure is put upon them by
irresponsible politicians, it is predictable that out of thin air, more money
will be created to satisfy the insatiable appetites of those on political
spending sprees. As money becomes more plentiful, it becomes less valuable, and
the average citizen suffers again as the value of their savings evaporates. It
has happened over and over in history, and what usually follows is the total
debasement of the currency, hyperinflation and chaos.

Sound economic policy would be to take our foot off the gas and apply the
brakes to government spending as the economic cliff approaches. We must get
back to where our economy produces actual wealth, rather than mere paper
wealth. The road back to fiscal sanity and a strong economy is simple: Congress
just needs to get back to following the Constitution.

