---
title: Social Security is not "Insurance"
author: Ron Paul
date: December 27, 2012
layout: page
---
Perhaps the biggest media story of 2010 was the influence of Tea Party voters
on the congressional landscape. The new congress comes to Capitol Hill with a
mandate to end profligate spending and restore fiscal sanity, we are told. But
when the House and Senate convene in January, the newly elected members will
face tremendous pressure to maintain spending levels for entitlement programs.
Even the most modest proposals to trim Social Security or Medicare spending
will be met with howls of indignation and threats of voter revolt. Legislators
who propose any kind of means testing or increased retirement ages can expect
angry visits from senior citizen lobbyists ready to fund a candidate back home
who supports the status quo.

But millions of Americans now realize that the status quo is an illusion that
will not last even another 10 or 20 years. The federal government cannot
continue to spend a trillion dollars more than it collects in revenue each
year, because we are running out of creditors. Fiscal reality is setting in,
and the consequences may be grim even if Congress finds the courage to take
decisive action now.

Courage begins with a commitment to see things as they are, rather than how we
wish they were. When it comes to Social Security, we must understand that the
system does not represent an old age pension, an “insurance” program, or even a
forced savings program. It simply represents an enormous transfer payment, with
younger workers paying taxes to fund benefits. There is no Social Security
trust fund, and you don’t have an “account.” Whether you win or lose the Social
Security lottery is a function of when you happened to be born and how long you
live to collect benefits. Of course young people today have every reason to
believe they will never collect those benefits.

Notice that neither political party proposes letting people opt out of Social
Security, which exposes the lie that your contributions are set aside and
saved. After all, if your contributions really are put aside for your
retirement, the money is there earning interest, right? If your money is in
your “account,” what difference would it make if your neighbor chooses not to
participate in the program? The truth, of course, is that your contributions
are not put aside. Social Security is simply a tax. Like all taxes, the money
collected is spent immediately as general revenue to fund the federal
government. But no administration will admit that Social Security is nothing
more than an accounting ledger with no money. You will collect benefits only if
future tax revenues materialize as hoped; the money you paid into the system is
long gone.

My hope is that at least some members of the new Congress will cut through the
distortions and see Social Security as it really is. The best way to fix the
impending Social Security crisis is also the simplest: allow younger
individuals to opt out of the program and use their tax savings to invest
privately as they see fit. This is the true private solution. Your money has
never been safe in the government’s hands, and it never will be.
