---
title: Healthcare Reform\: A Huge Misdiagnosis
author: Ron Paul
date: September 27, 2010
layout: page
---

This week marked six months since Congress passed the healthcare reform bill in
what has become all-too-typical legislative chicanery. Those in power crafted a
mammoth piece of legislation and rammed it through Congress under a dire sense
of emergency. Insisting on time enough to read the bill was dismissed as
dangerous and crazy in a time of crisis. We were told that if we really wanted
to see what was in the bill, we would have to pass it first. I cannot imagine
the founding fathers intended for Congress to legislate in this manner. I would
think if a Member is not absolutely certain the entire legislation meets
Constitutional muster, the default vote should be “no” in accordance with our
oath of office.

But now that Congress has had six months to read the new law, there is a
significant amount of buyer’s remorse on Capitol Hill. The more constituents
learn about the law, the more angry they become. 60% of Americans are now said
to be in favor of repealing the entire thing. Unfortunately, it is much more
difficult to repeal a law than to pass a bill.

I wrote a while back about the egregious provision to require businesses to
issue 1099s for all transactions over $600 as a way to partially pay for it. I
have cosponsored legislation to fix this issue, yet this is just the tip of the
iceberg.

First of all, in spite of the administration repeating over and over that this
legislation would not increase costs for Americans, they are now saying they
knew all along that it would. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimates
that American families will see their premiums rise by an average of $2100 by
2016. The Wall Street Journal has reported that the cost of compliance is
forcing some insurers to increase premiums by up to 20% as soon as next year!

Also, in spite of repeated claims from the administration that we could all
keep our plans and doctors if we liked them, the administration’s own officials
are now predicting that won’t be true for up to 117 million Americans who will
lose their current plans. Major insurers are also dropping child-only plans
because of mandates and price-fixing on such policies, leaving parents with
fewer choices for their children, not more.

In addition, in spite of claiming this law would contain government costs, not
increase them, administration actuaries now predict it will increase healthcare
spending by over $300 billion. This additional spending comes along with doctor
shortages, fewer choices and more taxes. Perhaps worst of all, increases in
labor costs because of health insurance mandates are discouraging employers
from hiring new workers and even triggering more layoffs.

Anyone with a basic understanding of Austrian economics could have predicted
the unintended consequences of these new healthcare policies. Central planning
never increases choices and quality or cuts costs as promised. Price controls
and government mandates always create artificial scarcity. Healthcare is not a
right, nor a privilege. It is a product, like food or clothing. As with any
good or service, the free market regulation of supply and demand provides the
optimum quality to the maximum number of people. Once we realize the problems
we are trying to solve today were created by government intervention beginning
in the 1960’s, we can begin to put patients and doctors back in control of
healthcare, rather than third party oligopolies and government bureaucrats. The
sooner, the better.

