---
title: On More Stimulus Spending
author: Ron Paul
date: September 13, 2010
layout: page
---

Faced with continuing economic decline and an impending election, the
administration, predictably, is entertaining the idea of another stimulus
package. To explain why the last one didn’t work, adherents to the Keynesian
economic philosophy are claiming that they actually did work – it just looks
like they didn’t because we don’t realize how much worse off we would be right
now without trillions of dollars of public spending. The last administration
bought into Keynesianism just as much as this one does, unfortunately. Until we
have leaders who understand that debt is not the way to prosperity, there will
be no stopping runaway government spending.

While it is nice to hear about business tax breaks, the positive results of
these tax cuts will be dwarfed by its negative effects. First of all, $200
billion or so in temporary tax cuts and credits to businesses are nothing
compared to the $3.8 trillion in tax hikes that will hit the economy like a ton
of bricks on January 1, 2011 if the Bush tax cuts are not extended by Congress.

Second of all, businesses are reluctant to hire and invest, not because they
are looking for temporary credits, but because of future uncertainty; they
simply don’t know what the government is going to do next and how future
government policies will affect decisions they make now. What new costs and
regulations will be placed on them with healthcare reform and financial
services reform? Will Congress convene a lame-duck session this winter to pass
cap-and-trade and other destructive legislation? What will the cost of
compliance be for hiring new employees, and will that force them to simply lay
off anyone they hire now? Worse, will the government come up with fines or
additional costs if businesses have to lay people off in the future? Right now,
the safest thing for businesses to do is nothing. Until we regain respect for
the rule of law and remove some of this uncertainty, I’m afraid none of these
temporary promises, made right before an election, will do much towards any
economic improvement.

The other glaring problem with this proposed stimulus package is that it
couples tax cuts with spending increases, which makes no sense when we are
already heavily indebted to foreign countries. We should be cutting taxes and
slashing government spending dramatically. The private sector simply cannot
bear the burden of our engorged public sector. In fact, one reason earlier
stimulus programs did not result in any private sector growth is because large
amounts went to the public sector. Indeed, the spending that the administration
is now proposing arguably constitutes a bailout of the public sector and
various union allies of the administration.

This administration is falling into the same dangerous trap we fell into during
the Great Depression, as did the Germans leading into their hyperinflation of
the 1920’s. The temptation is to do something, anything, proactive to attempt
to stimulate the economy, but history has shown us that governments cannot
spend their way into prosperity. The best thing government could do is get back
to its Constitutional limitations and let the economy stabilize, heal and
recover without the crushing burden of government holding it back.

