---
title: Don't Raise the Debt Ceiling!
author: Ron Paul
date:  Novemer 28, 2010
layout: page
---

As of November 7th, the total U.S. public debt outstanding reached an
astonishing $13.7 trillion. This means that although Congress just raised the
debt ceiling to $14.3 trillion back in February, the new Congress will face
another debt ceiling vote almost immediately next year. Otherwise, the Treasury
will not be able to continue issuing debt to fund government operations.

The upcoming vote will provide an interesting litmus test for the new
Republican congressional majority, especially those new members closely
identified with Tea Party voters. The debt ceiling law, passed in 1917, enables
Congress to place a statutory cap on the total amount of government debt rather
than having to approve each individual Treasury bond offering. It also,
however, forces Congress into an open and presumably somewhat shameful vote to
approve more borrowing.

If the new Congress gives in to establishment pressure and media alarmism about
“shutting down the government” by voting to increase the debt ceiling once
again, you will know that the status quo has prevailed. You will know that
Congress, despite the rhetoric of the midterm elections, is doing business as
usual. You will know that the simple notion of balancing the budget, by
limiting federal spending to federal revenue, remains a shallow and laughable
campaign platitude.

Of course congressional leaders– now Republicans– will tell America that they
plan on balancing the budget soon, but they just need some time. After all, we
have to keep the government open, right? We can’t have an “emergency” shutdown
of vital government services. But somehow Congress always finds money for
emergency spending, in the form of supplemental appropriations bills for TARP
bailouts, troop surges, and the like. Why is there never an emergency that
justifies less spending???

Surely we are facing an emergency debt spiral, as evidenced by the Federal
Reserve’s recent commitment to buy another round of Treasury debt. It’s now
quite obvious that the U.S. government plans to inflate its way out of debt,
and the world is fleeing our dollar in response. Just 7 years ago Congress
raised the debt ceiling to $6.4 trillion, which means the federal government
had doubled its indebtedness in less than a decade. Annual deficits for 2011
and beyond are projected to be at least $1 trillion. By contrast, the entire
federal debt amassed from the founding of our nation until President Reagan
took office in 1981– a period of roughly 200 years– was $1 trillion. So it’s no
exaggeration to state that federal debt is growing exponentially.

I have two simple proposals when the new Congress convenes in January. First,
refuse to raise the debt ceiling. Find a way, month by month, for Congress to
spend only what the Treasury raises in revenue. Second, start over from scratch
with the 13 appropriations bills that fund the federal government. Reject any
talk of baseline budgets or discretionary spending. It is all discretionary,
and members of both parties should vote against any 2012 appropriation bill
that is not at least 10% smaller– in nominal dollars– than its 2011
counterpart.

A motivated Congress could begin to slow the tide of debt by taking the simple
step of cutting federal spending by 10% across the board for the next few
years. Let’s hope it does not take the complete collapse of the U.S. dollar to
provide this motivation.
