---
title: The World Shorts the Dollar
author: Ron Paul
date: November 15, 2010
layout: page
---

A remarkable confluence of recent events has brought unprecedented but very
welcome attention to both U.S. monetary policy and the global political economy
in general.

First, Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben Bernanke recently announced that the
Fed would embark upon another round of monetary easing by purchasing $600
billion worth of U.S. Treasury debt. This amounts to an admission that markets
have run out of patience with our profligacy, and therefore our own central
bank literally must serve as the buyer of last resort for Treasury debt.

Second, World Bank president Robert Zoellick openly suggested that gold could
play a helpful role in the global monetary system by serving as reference
against more volatile fiat currencies. This is almost heresy coming from a
neoconservative globalist like Mr. Zoellick. It hints at an obvious but
unspoken truth that is anathema to politicians and central bankers alike:
namely, that gold could be viewed as…. money!

Finally, Mr. Obama attended the G20 summit in South Korea last week and found a
very chilly reception for his vision of American economic policy. Mr. Obama
argued for continued worldwide stimulus, via continued debasing of the U.S.
dollar, to bolster American exports. Several powerful European and Asian
finance ministers, however, rejected this approach out of hand as nothing short
of a currency war. They are committed to austerity measures at home, and don’t
want to let the U.S. simply monetize its past sins at their expense.

All of these events culminated in a tremendous amount of political and media
scrutiny aimed the Fed. Ordinary Americans are demanding answers and
accountability, and they are putting heat on their political representatives in
Washington to end the cozy “independence” from congressional oversight the Fed
has enjoyed for so long.

In the 35 years I have been studying, speaking, and writing about monetary
policy I have never before seen Congress or the financial press pay much
attention to the Fed. Monetary policy has always been considered boring on
Capitol Hill, something left to remote policy wonks far away from the din of
presidential or congressional politics. Congress always has been eager to leave
Fed governors well alone, with no oversight or accountability, as long as they
played along and papered over the growing budget deficits.

But it’s amazing what a global economic meltdown will do to the political and
media landscape. In just two short years, the Fed has become the hot topic and
a lightning rod for criticism. While it is gratifying to see so many formerly
uninterested politicians, economists, talk show hosts, and pundits suddenly
rally to attack the Fed, one can only wonder whether they truly understand that
central banking is inherently incompatible with our Constitution and a free
market economy.

In other words, it’s not enough to show outrage at the latest Fed action or
argue about the relative merits of Mr. Bernanke compared to his predecessors.
To reclaim our dollar and our economy, Americans must oppose central banking
per se. Fiat currencies cannot be “reformed” or “managed”. They are
fundamentally subject to ruinous debasement courtesy of the political and
economic ruling class. History shows that this is true in all nations at all
times.

