---
title: Free Markets Create Jobs
author: Ron Paul
date: October 4, 2010
layout: page
---

In this struggling economy it is essential for politicians to take a step back
and think about what government has been doing to business in this country. In
less than 200 years, the free market, property rights, and respect for the rule
of law took this nation from a rough frontier to a global economic superpower.
Today, however, our nation and our economy clearly are headed in the wrong
direction.

Of course, America has never enjoyed absolute free-market capitalism: creeping
government intrusion and special interest political patronage have existed and
increased since our founding. But America historically has permitted free
markets to operate with less government interference than other nations, while
showing greater respect for property rights and the rule of law. Less
government, respect for private property, and a relatively stable legal
environment allowed America to become the wealthiest nation on earth.

By contrast, the poorest nations almost always demonstrate hostility for free
markets, private property, and the rule of law. Capital formation,
entrepreneurship, credit, and wealth accumulation are uniformly discouraged in
poor countries. Private contracts are not reliably enforced, and private
property is not secure in the hands of owners. The predictable result is
widespread poverty and misery.

First and foremost, the role of government in business should be limited to
resolving contractual disputes. As long as both parties of a contract enter
into the arrangement willingly, without coercion, and with complete and
accurate information, they should be expected to live up to their end of the
deal. When a party cannot or will not honor the terms of a contract, it is
acceptable for government to provide a court system to resolve disputes in a
fair and impartial way.

Government should not dictate the terms of a contract to the parties involved.
However, throughout the 20th century, our government became increasingly
comfortable mandating terms that politicians find acceptable without regard to
what businesses or their customers might want. This interference has had a
chilling effect on the economy.

For example, government increases labor costs through minimum wage laws, union
requirements, healthcare mandates, and various other stipulations that decrease
a business’s capacity to hire as many employees as they might otherwise. And
because they can only hire a few, they must reserve those spots only for top
candidates. Thus, a teenager or a handicapped individual may miss out on job
opportunities and work experience because of government-created job shortages.
What if someone was willing to work for less than the government-mandated
minimum wage, and a business was willing to give them a chance? Government
makes this illegal, and both the business and the worker are worse off for it.

By contrast, business flourishes when government gets out of the way. One
example is playing out in the 14th congressional district in Texas. A major
multinational company, Caterpillar, is building an assembly facility in
Victoria, Texas, rather than in one of the heavily unionized midwest states
where it operates other plants. Texas, as a “right to work” state, offers more
manageable labor costs. It also offers a more business-friendly regulatory
landscape, and an overall lower tax burden with no corporate income tax. I am
pleased that because of this, the people of Victoria will be rewarded with more
job opportunities.

Freedom and a restrained government are what made us an economic power house.
If we keep chasing businesses away with onerous taxes, mandates, and
regulations, they will eventually leave. The best approach to our economic woes
that will help the most people is simple: get back to the Constitution and
demonstrate respect for free markets, private property, and the rule of law.

