---
title: Are Air Travelers Criminal Suspects?
author: Ron Paul
date: November 22, 2010
layout: page
---

The growing revolt against invasive TSA practices is encouraging to Americans
who are fed up with federal government encroachment in their lives. In the case
of air travelers, this encroachment is quite literally physical. But a
deep-seated libertarian impulse still exists within the American people, and
opposition to the new TSA full body scanner and groping searches is gathering
momentum.

The growing revolt against invasive TSA practices is encouraging to Americans
who are fed up with federal government encroachment in their lives. In the case
of air travelers, this encroachment is quite literally physical. But a
deep-seated libertarian impulse still exists within the American people, and
opposition to the new TSA full body scanner and groping searches is gathering
momentum.

I introduced legislation last week that is based on a very simple principle:
federal agents should be subject to the same laws as ordinary citizens. If you
would face criminal prosecution or a lawsuit for groping someone, exposing them
to unwelcome radiation, causing them emotional distress, or violating indecency
laws, then TSA agents should similarly face sanctions for their actions.

This principle goes beyond TSA agents, however. As commentator Lew Rockwell
recently noted, the bill “enshrines the key lesson of the freedom philosophy:
the government is not above the moral law. If it is wrong for you and me, it is
wrong for people in government suits… That is true of TSA crimes too.” The
revolt against TSA also serves as a refreshing reminder that we should not give
in to government alarmism or be afraid to question government policies.

Certainly, those who choose to refuse the humiliating and potentially harmful
new full body scanner machines may suffer delays, inconveniences, or worse. But
I still believe peaceful resistance is the most effective tool against federal
encroachment on our constitutional rights, which leads me to be supportive of
any kind of “opt-out” or similar popular movements.

After all, what price can we place on our dignity, personal privacy, and
physical integrity? We have a right not to be treated like criminals and
searched by federal agents without some reasonable evidence of criminal
activity. Are we now to accept that merely wishing to travel and board an
aircraft give rise to reasonable suspicion of criminality?

Also, let’s not forget that TSA was created in the aftermath of 9/11, when far
too many Americans were clamoring for government protection from the specter of
terrorism. Indeed it was congressional Republicans, the majority party in 2001,
who must bear much of the blame for creating the Department of Homeland
Security and TSA in the first place. Congressional Republicans also
overwhelmingly supported the Patriot Act, which added to the atmosphere of
hostility toward civil liberties in the name of state-provided “security.”

But as we’ve seen with TSA, federal “security” has more to do with humiliation
and control than making us safe. It has more to do with instilling a mindset of
subservience, which is why laughable policies such as removing one’s shoes
continue to be enforced. What else could explain the shabby, degrading
spectacle of a long line of normally upbeat Americans shuffling obediently
through airport security in their stocking feet?

TSA may be merely symbolic of much bigger problems with the federal government,
but it is an important symbol and we have a real chance to do something about
it. We must seize this opportunity, before TSA offers some cosmetic compromise
or the media spotlight fades. If you don’t live in my congressional district,
please consider contacting your member of Congress and asking him or her to
cosponsor HR 6416, the American Traveler Dignity Act of 2010. With enough help,
we can push the bill to a vote early next year. Unless grassroots Americans
take action, federal agencies like TSA will continue to bully us and ignore our
basic constitutional freedoms.

