---
title: Are Consumers Finally Winning in Washington?
author: Ron Paul
date: September 17, 2010
layout: page
---

This past week the administration announced its choice for the first credit
czar at the new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. This bureau was created
as part of the supposed Wall Street reform bill recently passed by Congress.
This new bureau, which represents nothing more than another layer of useless
Washington bureaucracy, will be housed within the Federal Reserve– one of the
most anti-consumer institutions in Washington.

The appointee named to run the bureau is an Ivy League professor. By her own
admission she is an academic, not a business person. She has very little real
world business experience with the highly complex financial instruments she
will oversee. The administration has done nothing to refute her
characterization by some in the financial press as an anti-business, ivory
tower leftist with an aversion to free market principles.

She also admits to being told, or warned, that the big banks always win in
Washington – yet she trumpeted the creation of this new agency as a win against
those banks. I would caution her against declaring victory too soon.

Outrageously, she has been appointed as a “special advisor” to design and lead
the bureau, but the administration has not disclosed the exact length of her
term. There will be no Senate confirmation hearings, nor will the public or the
financial industry be allowed to comment on her appointment. We simply are
expected to accept the appointment of an enormously powerful regulator without
question, and without regard to the constitutional requirement that the Senate
advise and consent with regard to her appointment. This means you, as a voter
and citizen, effectively have no say whatsoever for the duration of her
appointment. In the meantime, she has unprecedented new powers over private
business decisions.

The truth is that this new bureau is just more of the same ineffective and
damaging regulation we typically get from a crisis. Just as the FDA serves big
pharmaceutical companies, not patients, and just as the SEC serves Wall Street,
not investors, this agency will end up serving the banks. All regulatory
agencies eventually become co-opted by the industries they regulate, and they
become chiefly concerned with restricting the entry of new competitors and
protecting market share for the big players. This new bureau is not likely to
straighten out Wall Street, so much as it will instill a false sense of
security in the public about banking and investing again.

No bureaucrat, no federal agency, and no ivory tower academic can replace the
regulatory powers of the free market. “Caveat emptor” remains the rule for
intelligent investors and depositors. Buyers always need to beware, especially
when politicians say they have it all under control.

Real reform starts with transparency and an adherence to the rule of law. The
administration would do well to adhere to the law, rather than shoving a new
economic czar down our throats without congressional involvement. Real reform
would mean taking steps toward restoring sound money and getting back to the
Constitution. The Constitution does not allow for favors to special interests,
or handing out public money to keep private businesses afloat. The Constitution
necessitates a small, impartial government that first and foremost, protects
liberty, and sees all citizens as equal. It does not recognize a special
banking class. The fact that measures to achieve these ends are still quashed
tells me that indeed, the banks do still win in Washington.
