---
title: Distorting the Tax Policy Debate
author: Ron Paul
date: December 20, 2010
layout: page
---

George Orwell warned us about the use of “meaningless words” in politics, words
that are endlessly repeated by sloganeering politicians until they have no
meaning at all. Meaningless words certainly were on display during last week’s
congressional debate over the latest tax bill.

Over and over again we heard trite, empty phrases like “tax cuts for the
wealthiest 2%,” “tax giveaways,” “tax earmarks,” and “borrowing money to give
to millionaires.” Time and time again the same falsehoods were presented as
fact, and reported as such by a credulous media.

But all of these clichés about taxes are based on the presumption that
government has a right to all of your income, and so government “gives” you
something when it allows you to keep a portion of that income. To this mindset,
tax cuts represent a “cost” to government. After all, they argue, money that
really ought to go to the most noble of purposes– wealth redistribution via
taxation–is being kept by greedy people and corporations who just don’t want to
pay their fair share.

Far too many Americans truly believe that tax cuts represent a government
giveaway, indistinguishable from an outright subsidy or entitlement payment. To
combat this mindset, we need to be clear with our language.

A subsidy, properly understood, occurs when government takes tax dollars and
gives them to favored individuals, companies, or industries. A tax cut, by
contrast, simply means government takes less from an individual, company, or
industry. When government takes less from you, it has not given you anything;
it merely has harmed you less. This is the critical distinction that has been
lost in the endless, tired debate about tax policy.

Of course the bill passed last week did contain some actual spending, mostly in
the form of an extension of unemployment benefits for another 13 months. The
total spending in the bill amounted to about $60 billion. But the tax savings
in the bill, meaning the amount of money that will remain in the hands of
taxpayers rather than being sent to Washington, is approximately $850 billion.
So while a clean tax bill certainly would have been preferable, the tax relief
it contains is significant. It means $850 billion will be spent, saved, or
invested by American citizens rather than being sent into the black hole known
as the federal treasury.

The media, however, dutifully reported that opposition to the bill came from
concerned members of Congress who felt the $850 billion “cost” of the bill was
too high, and would add too much to the deficit. As always, they could not
distinguish between government giving and government taking away. The American
people already pay plenty in federal taxes; the deficit is the result of a
spending problem, not a revenue problem.

Had the bill not passed, millions of Americans would have seen their paychecks
shrink in January due to increased tax withholding. That is the plain and
simple truth, and that is why I voted for the bill.
