---
title: Mission Accomplished in Libya?
author: Ron Paul
date: August 29, 2011

layout: page
---

Even as a major hurricane hit America's eastern seaboard, the
administration is determined to expand the war in Libya while
threatening the regime in Syria. Is there any limit to government's
appetite to create more problems for our nation and economy?

Americans may be tempted to celebrate the apparent victory of US and
NATO backed rebels in Libya, since it seems the Gaddafi regime is
overthrown. But I believe any enthusiasm for our Libyan misadventure is
premature.

The Obama administration attacked Libya without a constitutional
declaration of war, without congressional authorization, without
meaningful consultation with Congress -- and without a dollar being
authorized from the House or Senate. It was a war started by a
president who turned to the United Nations for its authority and
ignored the authority of the US Congress.

Are we better off as a nation by ignoring and debasing our
Constitution? Are we better off having spent more than a billion
dollars attacking a country thousands of miles away that had not
threatened us? Are we more financially sound having expanded the empire
to include yet another protectorate and probable long-term military
occupation? Are we more admired throughout the world for getting
involved in yet another war?

Still, many will claim that getting rid of Libyan ruler Gaddafi was
worth it. They will say that the ends justify the means. As the
civilian toll from NATO bombs adds up in a war started under the guise
of protecting a civilian population, even the initial argument for
intervention is ridiculous. We should not forget that there were no
massacres taking place in Libya before the NATO attack. The attack was
a dubbed a preventative humanitarian intervention. But as soon as NATO
planes started bombing, civilians started dying.

Gaddafi may well have been a tyrant, but as such he was no worse than
many others that we support and count as allies. Disturbingly, we see a
pattern of relatively secular leaders in the Arab world being targeted
for regime change with the resulting power vacuum being filled by much
more radical elements. Iraq, post-Saddam, is certainly far closer to
Iran than before the US invasion. Will Libya be any different?

We already see grisly reprisals from the US-backed rebels against their
political opponents. There are disturbing scenes of looting and
lawlessness on the part of the rebels. We know that some rebel factions
appear to be allied with Islamic extremists and others seem to have
ties to the CIA. They also appear to have a penchant for killing each
other as well as supporters of the previous regime. The tribal
structure of Libyan society all but ensures that an ongoing civil war
is on the agenda rather than the Swiss-style democracy that some
intervention advocates suggest is around the corner.

What is next after such a victory? With the big Western scramble to
grab Libya's oil reserves amid domestic political chaos and violence,
does anyone doubt that NATO ground troops are not being prepared for
yet another occupation?

Neo-conservatives continue to dominate our foreign policy, regardless
of the administration in power. They do not care that we are bankrupt,
as they are too blinded by their desire for empire and their affection
for the entangling alliances we have been rightly counseled to avoid.
They have set their sights next on Syria, where the US moves steadily
toward intervention in another domestic conflict that has nothing to do
with the US. Already the US president has called for "regime change" in
Syria, while adding new sanctions against the Syrian regime. Are US
bombers far behind?
