---
title: On the Elimination of Osama bin Laden
author: Ron Paul
date: May 9, 2011

layout: default
---

Last week marked an important milestone in the war on terrorism for our
country. Osama bin Laden applauded the 9/11 attacks. Such deliberate
killing of innocent lives deserved retaliation. It is good that bin
Laden is dead and justice is served. The way in which he was finally
captured and killed shows that targeted retribution is far superior to
wars of aggression and nation-building. In 2001 I supported giving the
president the authority to pursue those responsible for the vicious
9/11 attacks. However, misusing that authority to pursue
nation-building and remaking the Middle East was cynical and dangerous,
as the past ten years have proven.

It is tragic that it took ten years, trillions of dollars, tens of
thousands of American casualties and many thousands of innocent lives
to achieve our mission of killing one evil person. A narrow, targeted
mission under these circumstances was far superior to initiating wars
against countries not involved in the 9/11 attacks, and that is all we
should have done. This was the reason I emphasized at the time the
principle of Marque and Reprisal, permitted to us by the US
Constitution for difficult missions such as we faced. I am convinced
that this approach would have achieved our goal much sooner and much
cheaper.

The elimination of Osama bin Laden should now prompt us to declare
victory and bring our troops home from Afghanistan and Iraq. Al Qaeda
was never in Iraq and we were supposedly in Afghanistan to get Osama
bin Laden. With bin Laden gone, there is no reason for our presence in
the region â€“ unless indeed it was all about oil, nation-building, and
remaking the Middle East and Central Asia.

Hopefully bin Laden does not get the last laugh. He claimed the 9/11
attacks were designed to get the US to spread its military dangerously
and excessively throughout the Middle East, bankrupting us through
excessive military spending as he did the Soviets, and to cause
political dissention within the United States. Some 70 percent of
Americans now believe we should leave Afghanistan yet both parties seem
determined to stay. The best thing we could do right now is prove bin
Laden a false prophet by coming home and ending this madness on a high
note.

Tragically, one result may be the acceptance of torture as a legitimate
tool for pursuing our foreign policy. A free society, calling itself a
republic, grounded in the rule of law, should never succumb to such
evil.

At the very least we should all be able to agree that foreign aid to
Pakistan needs to end immediately. The idea that bin Laden was safely
protected for ten years in Pakistan, either willfully or through
incompetence, should make us question the wisdom of robbing American
citizens to support any government around the world with foreign aid.
All foreign aid and intervention needs to end.

Our failed foreign policy is reflected in our bizarre relationship with
Pakistan. We bomb them with drones, causing hundreds of civilian
casualties, we give them billions of dollars in foreign aid for the
privilege to do so, all while they protect America's enemy number one
for a decade.

It is time to consider a sensible non-interventionist foreign policy as
advised by our Founders and authorized by our Constitution. We would
all be better off for it.
