---
title: Stop Raising the Debt Ceiling
author: Ron Paul
date: May 23, 2011
---

The federal government once again has reached the limit of its legal
ability to borrow money, meaning it cannot issue new Treasury debt
without action by Congress to increase the debt ceiling limit. As of
this month, our "official" national debt- which doesnâ€™t include the
staggering future payments promised to Social Security and Medicare
beneficiaries- stands at \$14.2 trillion.

The debt ceiling law, passed in 1917, enables Congress to place a
statutory cap on the total amount of government debt rather than having
to approve each individual Treasury bond offering. It also, however,
forces Congress into an open and presumably somewhat shameful vote to
approve more borrowing. If the new Republican majority in the House of
Representatives gives in to establishment pressure by voting to
increase the debt ceiling once again, you will know that the status quo
has prevailed. You will know that the simple notion of balancing the
budget, by limiting federal spending to federal revenue, remains a
shallow and laughable campaign platitude.

It is predictable that Congress will once again merely delay the
inevitable and raise the debt ceiling, after the usual rhetoric about
controlling spending, making cuts, and yes, raising taxes. We have
heard endless warnings about how irresponsible it would be to "shut
down the government." The implication is that sober, rational, mature
pundits and politicians understand reality, while those who oppose
raising the debt ceiling limit are reckless ideologues who will harm
the economy just to make a point.

But like any debtor that has to reduce its spending, the federal
government simply needs to establish priorities and stop spending money
on anything other than those priorities. Interest payments on our
federal bond debt likely will amount to about \$500 billion for fiscal
year 2011, an average of \$41 billion per month. Federal tax revenues
vary by month, but should total around \$2 trillion to \$2.5 trillion
for FY 2011-- an average of perhaps \$180 billion per month. So clearly
the federal government has sufficient tax revenue to make interest
payments to our creditors. For now, those interest payments represent
about 12% of the total federal budget.

What nobody wants to admit is this: even if the federal government has
only \$1.5 trillion remaining to spend in 2011 after interest payments,
this is PLENTY to fund the constitutional functions of government.
After all, the entire federal budget in 1990 was about \$1 trillion.
Does anyone seriously believe the federal government was too small or
too frugal just 20 years ago? Hardly. So why have we allowed the
federal budget to quadruple during those 20 years?

The truth is, in spite of how cataclysmic some might say it would be if
we did not pass a new debt ceiling, it is hardly the catastrophe that
has been advertised. The debt ceiling is a self-imposed limit on
borrowing. The signal congress sends to worldwide markets by raising
the debt ceiling is simple: business as usual will continue in
Washington; no real spending cuts will be made; and fiscal austerity
will remain a pipe dream.

When our creditors finally wise up and cut us off, we will be forced to
face economic realities whether we want to or not. It would be easier
to deal with the tough choices we face now, on our own terms, rather
than wait until we are at the mercy of foreign creditors. However,
leaders in Washington have no political will to admit that we cannot
afford to continue spending without any meaningful limit. They prefer
maintaining the illusion and putting off reality for another day.
