---
title: The Fed and Job Creation
author: Ron Paul
date: March 31, 2011

layout: page
---

Unemployment continues to plague our economy. In spite of constant
claims that we have just turned the corner into recovery, the jobs
reports remain grim with no real signs of improvement. While Keynesian
economists and big government apologists scratch their heads about
persistent unemployment in spite of unprecedented government
"investment" in the economy, free market economists understand the
problem perfectly well. In short, they understand that we are looking
to the Federal Reserve to solve an unemployment crisis that the Fed
itself largely created.

For example, the Fed is supposed to maintain full employment as half of
its "dual mandate". But the Fed simply has the wrong tools to do this.
In fact, its credit expansion and manipulation of interest rates cause
harm when they are applied to "help" the economy. As we saw with the
housing boom and bust, Fed-created inflation cannot be sustained
without harmful consequences. The Fed’s artificial boom led to the
unemployment we’re suffering today. The Fed is not a small business or
a manufacturer that creates value or increases productivity to sustain
real job growth. It literally destroys value by printing more money,
and distributing it through sweetheart deals to well connected banks
and corporations (including foreign banks!). The only success the Fed
has had in maintaining full employment has been on Wall Street where it
props up crony banks and investment houses to prevent them from going
bankrupt as they should. Instead, they survive to malinvest another day
while their executives enjoy jackpot bonuses.

The Fed also pumped up employment in the housing industry with
artificially low interest rates that created an unsustainable demand
for housing. Millions jumped into this sector when the money was loose
and the bubble inflating. Besides the many who bought houses they could
not afford and now face foreclosure, there were also those who became
employed in housing related fields. These people invested time and
money in training and spent years establishing careers in real estate,
mortgage lending, construction and contracting, careers that all
vanished into thin air with the burst of the bubble. Now they face
considerable disruption in their lives as they struggle with
unemployment, underemployment and decisions about retraining for
different careers. This amounts to a tremendous amount of unnecessary
waste that would not have occurred had the housing industry been
allowed to develop naturally according to market demands.

Jobs are properly created by entrepreneurs who are willing to work hard
and take calculated risks. Jobs are also created through real increases
in productivity, resulting from re-invested profits or conservative
borrowing at market interest rates. But the Fed has made those risks
impossible to calculate, and made borrowing money artificially cheap.
As a result, economic growth has been chilled while unemployment
skyrockets.

Until those in power understand the harm they do with central economic
planning, we will continue to slide backwards and lose jobs. The Fed
needs to stay out of the job creating business altogether and the
federal government needs to focus on its constitutional duties. Just
when we need government to back off, we hear about more government
intervention in the economy in the form of more spending, only they
call it "investment". It is more properly called "malinvestment", and
the resources that are funneled into industries by government policies
will only hurt employment more in the long run.

