---
title: A Dangerous Precedent
author: Ron Paul
date: October 10, 2011
---

According to the Fifth Amendment of the US Constitution, Americans are
never to be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process
of law. The Constitution is not some aspirational statement of values,
allowing exceptions when convenient, but rather, it is the law of the
land.  It is the basis of our Republic and our principal bulwark against
tyranny.

Last week’s assassination of two American citizens, Anwar al-Awlaki and
Samir Khan, is an outrage and a criminal act carried out by the
President and his administration.  If the law protecting us against
government-sanctioned assassination can be voided when there is a
"really bad American", is there any meaning left to the rule of law in
the United States?  If, as we learned last week, a secret government
committee, not subject to congressional oversight or judicial review,
can now target certain Americans for assassination, under what moral
authority do we presume to lecture the rest of the world about
protecting human rights?  Didn’t we just bomb Libya into oblivion under
the auspices of protecting the civilians from being targeted by their
government? Timothy McVeigh was certainly a threat, as were Nidal Hassan
and Jared Lee Loughner.  They killed people in front of many witnesses.
 They took up arms against their government in a literal way, yet were
still afforded trials.  These constitutional protections are in place
because our Founders realized it is a very serious matter to deprive any
individual of life or liberty.  Our outrage against even the obviously
guilty is not worth the sacrifice of the rule of law.  Al-Awlaki has
been outspoken against the United States and we are told he encouraged
violence against Americans.  We do not know that he actually committed
any acts of violence.  Ironically, he was once invited to the Pentagon
as part of an outreach to moderate Muslims after 9/11.  As the US
attacks against Muslims in the Middle East and Central Asia expanded, it
is said that he became more fervent and radical in his opposition to US
foreign policy.

Many cheer this killing because they believe that in a time of war, due
process is not necessary - not even for citizens, and especially not for
those overseas.  However, there has been no formal declaration of war
and certainly not one against Yemen. The post-9/11 authorization for
force would not have covered these two Americans because no one is
claiming they had any connection to that attack. Al-Awlaki was on a kill
list compiled by a secret panel within President Obama’s National
Security Council and Justice Department.  How many more Americans
citizens are on that list?  They won’t tell us. What are the criteria?
They won’t tell us. Where is the evidence? They won’t tell us.\
 
Al-Awlaki's father tried desperately to get the administration to at
least allow his son to have legal representation to challenge the "kill"
order. He was denied. Rather than give him his day in court, the
administration, behind closed doors, served as prosecutor, judge, jury,
and executioner.The most worrisome aspect of this is that any new powers
this administration accrues will serve as precedents for future
administrations.  Even those who completely trust this administration
must understand that if this usurpation of power and denial of due
process is allowed to stand, these powers will remain to be expanded on
by the next administration and then the next.  Will you trust them? 
History shows that once a population gives up its rights, they are not
easily won back.  Beware.
