---
title: The Fed Undermines Foreign Policy
author: Ron Paul
date: April 4, 2011

layout: page
---

Last week I was both surprised and pleased when the Supreme Court
upheld lower court decisions requiring the Federal Reserve Bank to
comply with requests for information made by Bloomberg under the
Freedom of Information Act ("FOIA"). Bloomberg simply wanted to know
who received loans from the Fed's discount window in the aftermath of
the 2008 financial market crisis, and how much each entity received.
Surely this is basic information that should be available to every
American taxpayer. But the Fed fought tooth and nail all the way to the
Supreme Court to preserve their privileged secrecy. However,
transparency and openness won the day. There are some 29,000 pages to
decipher, but a few points stand out initially.

The Fed lent huge sums of our money to foreign banks. This in itself
was not surprising, but the actual amount is staggering! In one week at
the height of the crisis, about 70% of the money doled out went to
foreign banks. We were told that bailing out banks was going to stave
off a massive depression. Depression for whom? We now know that the
Fed's bailout had nothing to do with helping the American people, who
have gotten their depression anyway with continued job losses and
foreclosures. But now we learn that a good deal of the money did not
even help American banks!

In light of recent world events, perhaps the most staggering revelation
is that quite a bit of money went to the Arab Banking Corp., in which
the Libyan Central Bank owned about a third of its stock. This occurred
while Libya, a declared state sponsor of terrorism, was under strict
economic sanctions! How erratic the US must appear when we shower a
dictator alternately with dollars and bombs! Also, we must consider the
possibility that those loans are inadvertently financing weapons
Gaddaffi is using against his own people and western militaries. This
would not be the first time the covert activities of the Fed have
undermined not only our economy and the value of the dollar, but our
foreign policy as well.

Of course I can't say I'm surprised by the poor quality of the data
provided by the Fed. The category of each loan made, whether from the
"Primary Discount Window", the "Secondary Discount Window," or "Other
Extensions of Credit," is redacted. Thus, we don't know with certainty
how much discount window lending was provided to foreign banks and how
much was merely "other extensions of credit". Also, some of the numbers
simply do not seem to add up. We are of course still wading through the
massive document dump, but it does seem as though several billions of
dollars are unaccounted for.

As the world economy continues to falter in spite of - or rather
because of - cheap money doled out by the Federal Reserve, its ability
to deceive financial markets and American taxpayers is coming to an
end. People are beginning to realize that when the fed in effect
doubles the worldwide supply of US dollars in a relatively short time,
it has the effect of stealing half your money through reduced
purchasing power. Rapid inflation will continue as trillions in new
money and credit recently created by the Fed flood into the commodity
markets.

It is becoming more and more obvious that the Fed operates for the
benefit of a few privileged banks, banks that never suffer for bad
decisions they make. Quite the opposite - as we have seen since October
2008, under our current monetary system politically-connected banks are
paid to make bad decisions.
