---
title: How Should Government Treat Energy Producers?
author: Ron Paul
date: June 27, 2011
---

As the economy continues in its downward spiral and talks in Congress
about reducing spending have only amounted to political theater, the
subject of how the tax code treats energy has become a topic of
controversy. Specifically, should we subsidize, enforce mandates, or
give tax credits and deductions to industries like ethanol and natural
gas? Having a thriving energy market domestically is a good thing and
something the government should not hinder. Not only would decreasing
our dependence on foreign oil simplify our foreign policy, but it would
greatly enhance our anemic economy at home.

Of course, the government should neither inhibit nor subsidize any
particular type of energy. While many people agree with that statement,
there is much confusion over the difference between government
subsidies and tax credits or deductions. The difference is night and
day, yet so many times they are all lumped together as evil government
handouts. A subsidy IS a government handout. It amounts to the
government taking money from the people and giving it to a favored
interest. It is the worst sort of market manipulation and it is
something I can never support. This kind of government mischief is
anathema to the Constitution and the principles of freedom and the free
market.

By contrast, with tax credits and deductions, industries, business, and
individuals simply get to keep more of the money they have earned.
Ideally, the tax code should not be used for social engineering, but,
until we have true tax reform, I will always support tax credits and
deductions that keep more dollars in the private sector where they are
spent, saved, or invested. This means I will support tax credits and
deductions for energy producers, farmers, homeschoolers, family child
care expenditures, expenses of evacuees from disaster areas, and even
adoption expenses. I've almost never met a tax cut, deduction, or
credit I didn't like. Any measure that keeps money in the private
sector to spend, save or invest, rather than allowing the government to
waste or misallocate is a win for the economy.

Inequities in the tax code dealing with tax credits should be solved by
giving all participants equal treatment. Removing tax credits is
nothing more than a tax increase.

I oppose ethanol mandates because I do not think anyone should be
forced to use or buy ethanol. Ethanol mandates often serve as corporate
welfare for big agriculture ethanol producers. The marketplace should
decide whether or not to use ethanol, and producers of ethanol have to
discover if they can produce it at a price that makes good business
sense. No industry should be allowed to use legislation to create a
"market" for its products. The real reason ethanol mandates continue to
surface in federal legislation is that agribusiness continues to have
one of the most powerful lobbies in Washington.

Furthermore, while I do not support providing federal grants to any
industry, I do support the tax credits contained in the NAT Gas Act, HR
1380. These credits reduce taxes for the production or purchase of
vehicles that run on American-made natural gas. These credits are not
subsidies. Of course, we should repeal federal barriers to energy
production and reduce taxes on all forms of energy. Therefore, I have
also introduced the Affordable Gas Price Act HR 1102 which would remove
governmental barriers to offshore drilling, encourage private
investment in new refineries and suspend taxes on gasoline when the
price at the pump reaches a certain threshold. Lowering taxes to
encourage the domestic production of energy and getting government out
of the way of the American energy market is not a government giveaway;
it is the way it should be in a free country.
