---
title: Buying Friends Creates More Enemies
author: Ron Paul
date: March 7, 2011
---

Last week Secretary of State Hillary Clinton testified before the House
Foreign Affairs Committee, and I had the opportunity to raise some of
my concerns regarding US foreign policy and the costs of our
interventionism around the world.

Many observers claim that the recent overthrow of governments in
northern Africa and the Middle East will result in more liberty for
individuals across those regions. I sincerely hope this proves to be
true, but history is replete with revolutions that began as a cry for
freedom against oppressive governments but ended badly. There are no
guarantees that Egyptians, Tunisians, or others will be better off
after these heralded regime changes.

We do know, however, that these conflicts in Africa and the Middle East
can be made worse if the U.S. government attempts to intervene and
support certain candidates or factions. Such intervention would not
further US interests or win us new friends, but in fact would undermine
the legitimacy of any government that may emerge after the end of old
regimes. Just as we would resent and reject any political force that
came to power here with the sponsorship of a foreign government,
Egyptians, Tunisians, Libyans, and others are not likely to take kindly
to what they view as one US puppet being replaced by another US puppet.
It is ironic, but the US government’s endless promotion of "democracy"
overseas actually distorts and undermines democracy in targeted
nations. The involvement of a foreign power often undermines true
self-determination.

Radicals who understand this may use rising resentment and
anti-Americanism as leverage to gain power, thus defeating the stated
purpose of US involvement in the first place. I have never understood
how the US government justifies subsidizing a newspaper or political
party abroad in the name of promoting independence and pluralism. It
makes no sense.

Unfortunately it seems to me that the administration has learned
nothing from recent events in the Mediterranean region. Secretary
Clinton emphasized several times at the committee hearing that "nothing
is off the table" with regard to a US response to internal civil unrest
in Libya. Since when is it our obligation to use political pressure or
even military force to solve every problem overseas? Washington is
currently buzzing with talk of "no-fly zones" and even a land invasion
of Libya to aid rebel groups seeking to overthrow the Gadaffi regime.
Some military leaders, including Defense Secretary Robert Gates, have
rightly warned the more enthusiastic interventionists that such
military operations can be enormously costly both financially and in
lives.

The costs of trying to run the world are unsustainable, and we simply
don’t have the money. Morally, it is inexcusable for the US to pick
sides in such conflicts overseas, no matter how odious either side may
be. Financially, it is no longer possible. The 2012 budget request from
the administration for "international affairs," which is code for
"foreign aid", is two and a half times larger than it was just nine
years ago! As our economy shrinks at home, our obligations increase
abroad. As our infrastructure crumbles at home, we continue to spend
billions expanding infrastructure in places like Afghanistan and Iraq.
If the interventionists have their way, no doubt we will be soon pay to
reconstruct the infrastructure we destroy in a Libyan military
operation. It does not take a genius to see that we are going broke,
but Washington remains in denial and intent on business as usual. I
fear that if we continue this way we may soon be out of business
altogether.
