---
title: We're From the Government. We're Here to Help.
author: Ron Paul
date: September 5, 2011

layout: page
---

In the wake of hurricane Irene, the Federal Emergency Management Agency
is expected to come hat in hands asking for more money from Congress.
Like the rest of the government, it is broke. It has been suggested
that any additional funds allocated to FEMA should come from cuts
elsewhere. This seems harsh and lacking in compassion to big government
advocates who do not understand economics, but I would go a step
further. FEMA should never have been established. It is based on
misguided ideas of disaster relief.

This seems shocking to those who have never been subjected to the
secondary disaster that is the arrival of FEMA on the scene of a
catastrophic event. But explaining FEMAâ€™s ineptness is not the same
thing as saying no one should help people affected by disasters. Quite
the opposite.

Victims of disasters should get any and all help possible, and there is
virtually no limit to the generosity and compassion of good American
people after devastation hits. One only need to remember the outpouring
after Katrina to know this is true. FEMA, however, did more to get in
the way of relief than to actually provide and facilitate it. The
examples are numerous. When the call was put out for volunteer
firefighters, they volunteered by the thousands. It was FEMA, for
reasons of control and bureaucratic ineptitude, who made sure they were
not, in fact allowed to actually help. When a group of firefighters
arrived from Houston, instead of being put immediately on the job, they
were told to sit around and wait. After waiting for two days doing
nothing, they were simply sent home. One thousand volunteer
firefighters were sent to Atlanta to undergo sexual harassment training
while fires actively raged in the city. The ones that remained through
this stupidity were sent to escort the president around or to
distribute fliers instead of putting out fires. Computer engineer Jack
Harrison was told his skills were needed to rebuild technological
infrastructure. After being given the runaround for about two weeks, he
was misallocated as head of security on the cruise ship FEMA had
leased, when he should have been using his skills to help. All manner
of help was turned away or mismanaged by FEMA while people suffered and
waited. Even the Red Cross had its hands tied by FEMA.

It has only gotten worse since 9/11. Compare the stories of two
flotillas - one after 9/11 and one after Katrina. Within an hour of the
9/11 attacks, the largest boatlift in history was organized
spontaneously by locals who saw an immediate need and responded
immediately. Over 500,000 terrified New Yorkers were taken off the
island by ferries, tugboats, pleasure crafts, fishing boats and barges
when all other access points had been shut down. A similar flotilla
attempt was privately organized after Katrina. 500 boats caravanned to
New Orleans to rescue patients from hospitals that were out of supplies
and desperate. Unfortunately, FEMA had taken over by then and they were
turned away, empty, while the patients languished, still stranded.
Tragically, the Vermont Air National Guard helicopters were in Iraq
when Irene hit, and they were desperately needed here.

The establishment of FEMA is symptomatic of a blind belief in big
government's ability to do anything and everything for anyone and
everyone. FEMA is a bureaucratic organization. Bureaucracies, while
staffed with well-meaning people, are notoriously slow and wasteful by
their very nature. When people are starving, injured and dying they
need speed and efficiency, yet FEMA comes along with forms and policies
and rubber stamps. This sort of thing is bad enough at the DMV, but in
matters of life and death where seconds count, this is just not
acceptable.

True compassion would be to get FEMA out of the way.
