---
title: Waking Up to Economic Realities
author: Ron Paul
date: April 25, 2011
---

Last week the financial markets were roiled by Standard & Poor’s
announcement that they will change their outlook on the fiscal health
of the United States over the next two years from "stable" to
"negative". The administration decried this decision as political.
However, it seems the only political thing about this decision is the
fact that it took so long. The Washington Post recently reported that
the White House and the Treasury Department put tremendous pressure on
S&P not to do this. However, if S&P made its ratings based on political
pressures rather than economic reality, it would cease to have any
relevance to the business community. Even if S&P delayed its
announcement that U.S. government bond market would be downgraded, at
some point it would become obvious that the finances of this country
are out of control and our leadership is out of touch. All credibility
would be lost if S&P simply continued to assign U.S. debt a AAA rating.

S&P noted in its announcement that negotiations among leaders in
Washington to address deficit concerns did not sound promising, and
expressed skepticism that politicians could agree to any viable budget
compromise. Of course this has been obvious for years but in the midst
of the current debate over raising the debt limit it is perhaps the
wake-up call that Washington needs. For decades politicians and
government officials have been able to maintain their denial about our
real financial situation, patching the system together by passing
emergency and supplemental funding bills, issuing more debt, and
allowing the Federal Reserve and foreign creditors to paper over
deficits with more monetary expansion. I’ve said many times the real
day of reckoning comes when fiscal and monetary tricks no longer work
and there are no buyers for our debt.

Even the most conservative budget that has been proposed by Republican
leadership requires raising the debt ceiling by an additional \$9
trillion by 2021. This demonstrates absolutely that no one in power
right now has any real intention of addressing our spending problems or
paying down the debt. They simply expect to continue to borrow and run
up more debt forever, without limit. Yet they always imagine our dollar
will have value no matter how many we print. This expectation is
foolish and naïve. I guarantee that those buying our debt are not
foolish and naïve enough to go along with this charade forever.

The S&P announcement may just be the harbinger of economic realities
acting as a restraint on government expansion. Government is not
anxious to cap its own growth, in spite of misnomers like "debt limit"
or "deficit reduction". Government will continue to grow like a cancer,
sapping our country of its wealth and freedom until the laws of
economics no longer can be ignored.
