---
title: Enabling a Future American Dictator
author: Ron Paul
date: May 30, 2011

layout: page
---

These are truly troubling days for liberty in the United States.

Last week the 60 day deadline for the president to gain congressional
approval for our military engagement in Libya under the War Powers
Resolution came and went. The media scarcely noticed. The bombings
continued. We had a hearing on Capitol Hill on the subject, but the
administration refuses to bother with the legality of its new war. It
is unclear if Mr. Obama will ever obtain congressional consent, and
astonishingly it is being argued that he doesn't need it.

Article 1 Section 8 of the Constitution begs to differ. It clearly
states that the power to declare war rests within the legislative
branch - the branch closest to the people. The founders were a
war-weary people, and the requirement that it would take an act of
Congress to go to war was intentional. They believed war was not to be
entered into lightly, so they resisted granting such decision making
authority to one person. They objected to absolute warmaking power
granted to Kings. It would be incredibly na√Øve to think a dictator
could not or would not wrest power in this country.

Our Presidents can now, on their own: order assassinations, including
American citizens; operate secret military tribunals; engage in
torture; enforce indefinite imprisonment without due process; order
searches and seizures without proper warrants, gutting the 4th
Amendment; ignore the 60 day rule for reporting to the Congress the
nature of any military operations as required by the War Power
Resolution; continue the Patriot Act abuses without oversight; wage war
at will; and treat all Americans as suspected terrorists at airports
with TSA groping and nude x-rays.

Americans who are not alarmed by all of this are either not paying
close attention, or are too trusting of current government officials to
be concerned. Those in power right now might be trustworthy, upstanding
people. But what of the leaders of the future? They will inherit all
the additional powers we cede to the current position holders. Can we
trust that they will not take advantage? Today's best intentions create
loopholes and opportunities for tomorrow's tyrants.

Perhaps the most troubling power grab of late is the mission creep
associated with the 9/11 attacks and the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Initiated as targeted strikes against the perpetrators of 9/11, a
decade later we are still at war. With whom? Last week Congress passed
a Defense Authorization bill with some very disturbing language that
explicitly extends the president's war powers to just about anybody.
Section 1034 of that bill states that we are at war with the Taliban,
al Qaeda, and associated forces. Who are the associated forces? It also
includes anyone who has supported hostilities in aid of an organization
that substantially supports these associated forces. This authorization
is not limited by geography, and it has no sunset provision. It doesn't
matter if these associated forces are American citizens. Your
constitutional rights no longer apply when the United States is "at
war" with you. Would it be so hard for someone in the government to
target a political enemy and connect them to al Qaeda, however
tenuously, and have them declared an associated force?

My colleague Congressman Justin Amash spearheaded an effort to have
this troubling language removed, but unfortunately it failed by a vote
of 234 to 187. It is unfortunate indeed, that so many in Congress
accept unlimited warmaking authority in the hands of the executive
branch.
