---
title: The Folly of Sanctions
author: Ron Paul
date: November 28, 2011

layout: default
---

Many people have the misconception that sanctions are an effective means
to encourage a change of behavior in another country without war.
However, imposing sanctions and blockades are not only an act of war
according to international law, they are most often the first step
toward a real war starting with a bombing campaign. Sanctions were the
first step in our wars against Iraq and Libya, and now more sanctions
planned against Syria and Iran are leading down the same destructive
path.

According to the International Atomic Energy Agencyâ€™s (IAEA) latest
report, just out this month, there is no evidence that Iran has
diverted enriched uranium from the peaceful and lawful generation of
power toward building a nuclear weapon. According to the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty, Iran has every right to develop nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. Unfortunately, US foreign policy has
boxed Iran into a corner where they may view development of a nuclear
weapon as the only way to maintain sovereignty. They are surrounded by
unfriendly nuclear powers and history has shown that having a nuclear
weapon is the best way to avoid being bombed or invaded. The unintended
consequences of our confrontational policies toward Iran may be to
actually encourage them to seek nuclear weapons capabilities. We should
be using diplomacy rather than threats and hostility.

Fortunately there is another way. Nothing promotes peace better than
free trade. Countries that trade with each other generally do not make
war on each other, as both countries gain economic benefits they do not
want to jeopardize. China is a massive nuclear power yet it does not
seek military confrontation with the United States. Trade is much more
profitable. Also trade and friendship applies much more effective
persuasion to encourage better behavior, as does leading by example.
Alarmingly, tough new sanctions are under consideration that would also
punish Iran's trading partners, including China, Russia, and possibly
our NATO allies such as Germany.

Conversely, sanctions allow regimes to blame their shortcomings on
foreigners, thereby maintaining a hold on power. They rarely even
inconvenience elites in the target countries. They simply provide a
common enemy to rally the people against and undermine internal
dissent. Consider how well the embargo has worked against Cuba. Fidel
Castro and his regime may be annoyed by the inability to trade with
their neighbors just 90 miles away, but American businessmen also lose
out in the bargain. That means less jobs and less freedom at home.

We should be clear about this: sanctions against Iran are definite
steps toward a US attack. Already we see US warships approaching the
region, moving dangerously close to Syrian waters. The tougher
sanctions currently under consideration would disrupt global trade and
undermine the US economy, which in turn harms our national security.
Foreign companies or foreign subsidiaries of US companies would be
severely punished if they did not submit to the US trade embargo on
Iran. We must change our foreign policy to one of economic freedom and
diplomacy. That is the only way to promote peace and prosperity. This
race to war against Iran and Syria is both foolhardy and dangerous.
