---
title: TSA Releases VIPR Venom on Tennessee Highways
author: Ron Paul
date: October 24, 2011

layout: page
---

If you thought the "Transportation Security Administration" would limit
itself to conducting unconstitutional searches at airports, think
again.  The agency intends to assert jurisdiction over our nation’s
highways, waterways, and railroads as well.  TSA launched a new campaign
of random checkpoints on Tennessee highways last week, complete with a
sinister military-style acronym--VIP(E)R—as a name for the program.

As with TSA’s random searches at airports, these roadside searches are
not based on any actual suspicion of criminal activity or any factual
evidence of wrongdoing whatsoever by those detained.  They are, in
effect, completely random.  So first we are told by the U.S. Supreme
Court that American citizens have no 4^th^amendment protections at
border crossings, even when standing on U.S. soil.  Now TSA takes the
next logical step and simply detains and searches U.S. citizens at
wholly internal checkpoints. 

The slippery slope is here.  When does it end?  How many more
infringements on our liberties, our property, and our basic human rights
to travel freely will it take before people become fed up enough to
demand respect from their government?  When will we demand that the
government heed obvious constitutional limitations, and stop treating
ordinary Americans as criminal suspects in the absence of probable
cause?

The real tragedy occurs when Americans incrementally become accustomed
to this treatment on the roads just as they have become accustomed to it
in the airports. We already accept arriving at the airport 2 or more
hours before a flight to get through security; will we soon have to
build in an extra 2 or 3 hours into our road trips to allow for
checkpoint traffic? 

Worse, some people are lulled into a false sense of security and are
actually grateful for this added police presence!  Should we really hail
the expansion of the police state as an enhancement to safety?  I submit
that an attitude of acquiescence to TSA authority is thoroughly
dangerous, un-American, and insulting to earlier freedom-loving
generations who built this country.

I am certain people will complain about this, once they have to sit in
stopped traffic for a few extra hours to allow for random searches of
cars.  However, I am also certain it merely will take another "foiled"
plot to silence many people into gladly accepting more government
mismanagement of safety. 

Vigilant, observant, law-abiding, gun-owning citizens defend themselves
and stop crimes every day before police can respond.  That is the source
of real security in America:  the 2^nd^ Amendment right to defend
oneself.  The answer is for people to be empowered to protect
themselves.  Yet how many weapons might these checkpoints
confiscate?  Even when individual go through all the legal hoops of
licensing and permits, the chances of harassment or outright
confiscation of weapons and detention of citizens when those weapons are
found at a TSA checkpoint is extremely high. 

Disarming the highways and filling them full of jack-booted thugs
demanding to see our papers is no way to make them safer.  Instead, it
is a great way to expand government surveillance powers and tighten the
noose around our liberties.
