---
title: No Mandatory Mental Health Screening for Children!
author: Ron Paul
date: December 12, 2011
---

Maryanne Godboldo, a mother in Michigan, noticed that pills prescribed
by her daughter's doctor were making her condition worse, not better.
So Mrs. Godboldo stopped giving them to her. That's when the trouble
began. When Child Protective Services (CPS) bureaucrats became aware
that the girl was not receiving her prescribed medication, they decided
the child should be taken away from her mother's custody on grounds of
medical neglect. When Ms. Godboldo refused to surrender her daughter to
the state, CPS enlisted the help of a police SWAT team! On March 24 of
this year a 12 hour standoff ensued and young Ariana was taken into
custody. The drug involved was Risperdal, a neuroleptic antipsychotic
medication with numerous known side effects. Ms. Godboldo had decided
on a more holistic approach for her daughter. She is still engaged in a
costly legal battle with the state over Ariana's treatment and custody.

This is one example of how government's increasing proclivity to
medicate children with questionable psychiatric drugs violates the
rights of parents. Just recently, the Government Accountability Office
released a report on the astonishingly high rate of prescriptions for
psychotropic drugs for children in the foster care system. It is
absolutely astounding that nearly 40% of kids in foster care are on
psychotropic drugs, some of them taking up to 5 different pills at a
time. Some of these children are under one year of age - too young to
safely take over the counter cold medication!

To fight this dangerous trend I reintroduced the Parental Consent Act
of 2011, HR 2769, which prohibits federal funds from being used to
establish or implement any universal or mandatory mental health or
psychiatric screening program. The previous administration pushed hard
for this type of federal intrusion into the medical decisions of
families through its wildly misnamed "New Freedom Commission on Mental
Health." Everyone interested in parental rights and true health freedom
must fight to make sure the commission's findings and dubious
psychiatric science are never used as justification to force mental
health screening on American kids at school without their parents'
consent.

There has been a persistent lobbying effort, funded by pharmaceutical
companies, to increase the number of these prescriptions to even more
children. A universal screening program is the stated goal of these
lobbyists. I would not be at all surprised to see the recent attention
to the issue of schoolyard bullying used as a tool towards these ends.

Imagine the potential ramifications of a universal, mandatory
psychiatric health screening program in a public school, considering
how some bureaucrats are wont to behave! The diagnostic criteria for
many mental illnesses remain vague and subjective. Therefore it is all
too easy for a bureaucrat in a white coat to label a child with some
sort of psychiatric syndrome simply because they were having a bad day,
or behaving as a typical rambunctious child. That label could follow
them around the rest of their school career and come with a number of
prescriptions attached, which the state, as in the Godboldo case, may
try to force the parents to administer, whether they want to or not.

I plan to continue the fight to ban federal funding of any universal
screening program that imposes mental healthcare screening on children
without express informed consent from parents.
