---
title: Fed and Inflation
author: Ron Paul
date: March 21, 2011
---

Last week, the subcommittee which I chair held a hearing on monetary
policy and rising prices. Whether we consider food, gasoline, or
clothing, the cost of living is increasing significantly. True
inflation is defined as an increase in the money supply. All other
things being equal, an increase in the money supply leads to a rise in
prices. Inflationâ€™s destructive effects have ruined societies from the
Roman Empire to WeimarGermany to modern-day Zimbabwe.

Blame for the most recent round of price increases has been laid at the
feet of the Federal Reserve's program of credit expansion for the past
three years. The current program, known as QE2, sought to purchase a
total of \$900 billion in US Treasury debt over a period of 8 months.
Roughly \$110 billion of newly created money is flooding into commodity
markets each month.

The price of cotton is up more than 170% over the past year, oil is up
over 40%, and many categories of food staples are seeing double-digit
price growth. This means that food, clothing, and gasoline will become
increasingly expensive over the coming year. American families, many of
whom already live paycheck to paycheck, increasingly will be forced by
these rising prices into unwilling tradeoffs: purchasing ground beef
rather than steak, drinking water rather than milk, and choosing canned
vegetables over fresh in order to keep food on the table and pay the
heating bill. Frugality can be a good thing, but only when it is by
choice and not forced upon the citizenry by the Fed's ruinous monetary
policy.

While the Fed takes credit for the increase in the stock markets, it
claims no responsibility for the increases in food and commodity
prices. Most economists fail to understand that inflation is at its
root a monetary phenomenon. There may be other factors that contribute
to price increases, such as famine, flooding, or global unrest, but
those effects are transient. Consistently citing only these factors,
while never acknowledging the effects of monetary policy, is a cop-out.

The unelected policymakers at the Fed are also the last to feel the
effects of inflation. In fact, they benefit from it, as does the
government as a whole. Those who receive this new money first, such as
government employees, contractors, and bankers are able to use it
before price increases occur, while those further down the totem pole
suffer price increases before they see any wage increases. By
continually reducing the purchasing power of the dollar, the Fed's
monetary policy also punishes savings and thrift. After all, why save
rapidly depreciating dollars?

Unfortunately, those policymakers who exercise the most power over the
economy are also the least likely to understand the effects of their
policies. Chairman Bernanke and other members of the Federal Open
Market Committee were convinced in mid-2008 that the economy would
rebound and continue to grow through 2009, even though it was clear to
many observers that we were in the midst of a severe economic crisis.
Even Greenspan was known for downplaying the importance of the growing
housing bubble just as it was reaching its zenith. It remains
impossible for even the brilliant minds at the Fed to achieve both the
depth and breadth of knowledge necessary to enact central economic
planning without eventually bringing the country to economic ruin. Our
witnesses delved deeply into these issues and explained this phenomenon
in very logical, simple terms. The American people increasingly
understand what is going on with our money. I only hope the Fed is
listening.
