---
title: Constitutional Problems with the Libyan War
author: Ron Paul
date: March 28, 2011

layout: page
---

Last week the Obama Administration took the United States to war
against Libya without bothering to notify Congress, much less obtain a
Constitutionally-mandated declaration of war. In the midst of our
severe economic downturn, this misadventure has already cost us
hundreds of millions of dollars and we can be sure the final price tag
will be several times higher.

Why did the US intervene in a civil war in a country that has neither
attacked us nor poses a threat? We are told this was another
humanitarian intervention, like Clinton’s 1999 war against Serbia. But
as civilian victims of the US-led coalition bombing continue to add up,
it is getting difficult to determine whether the problem we are
creating on the ground is worse than the one we were trying to solve.

Though the administration seems to be playing with semantics, calling
this a "kinetic military action," let’s be clear: this is a US act of
war on Libya. Imposing a no-fly zone over the air space of a sovereign
nation is an act of war, as Secretary of Defense Robert Gates pointed
out before the bombing began. That the administration hesitates to call
this war, possibly due to the troubling Constitutional implications,
does not mean that it is not one. Article 1 Section 8 of the
Constitution could not be clearer: the power and obligation to declare
war resides solely in the US Congress.

There was ample time and opportunity for the administration to consult
the UN, NATO and the Arab League before going to war, but not the US
Congress.

Aside from the manner in which the administration took us to war, it is
also troubling that our government has taken a decisive stand for one
side of an internal conflict in another sovereign country. The
administration speaks out of both sides of its mouth on this, claiming
that the US is not attempting to overthrow the Gaddafi regime while
clearly benefitting the rebels and stating that Gaddafi must leave.
Does this make any sense? Gaddafi may well be every bit the "bad guy"
we are told he is, but who are the rebels we are assisting? Do we have
any clue? Will they bring freedom and prosperity to Libya if they are
victorious? We might like to hope so, but the fact is, we don’t know.
Michael Scheuer, former head of the CIA’s Bin Laden unit, explained in
a recent article that there is plausible reason to believe the rebels
are current or former Islamist mujahedin, eager to engage in jihad.
Indeed, Gaddafi has fought against Libyan Islamists for years and is
seen by them as a bitter enemy. Astoundingly, it may well be that we
are assisting al Qaeda in this new war!

The costs of this terrible mistake cannot be ignored. Congress has been
locked in battles over budget cuts and agonizing over ways to save
money. Recent proposed spending cuts have by now been completely wiped
out with this new war! Will we be rebuilding Libya ten years from now?
Will Congress simply roll over and rubber stamp more emergency spending
bills for this new war as they have done in the past? We must end our
participation in any attack on Libya immediately and I have signed on
to legislation that would do exactly that. Congress must assert its
Constitutional authority and rein in an administration clearly out of
control.
