---
title: Deception at the Fed
author: Ron Paul
date: February 14, 2011

layout: page
---

For the past three decades, the Federal Reserve has been given a dual
mandate: keeping prices stable and maximizing employment. This policy
relies not only on the fatal conceit of believing in the wisdom of
supposed experts, but also on numerical chicanery.

Rather than understanding inflation in the classical sense as a
monetary phenomenon-- an increase in the money supply- it has been
redefined as an increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI). The CPI is
calculated based on a weighted basket of goods which is constantly
fluctuating, allowing for manipulation of the index to keep inflation
expectations low. Employment figures are much the same, relying on
survey data, seasonal adjustments, and birth/death models, while the
major focus remains on the unemployment rate. Of course, the
unemployment rate can fall as discouraged workers drop out of the labor
market altogether, leading to the phenomenon of a falling unemployment
rate with no job growth.

In terms of keeping stable prices, the Fed has failed miserably.
According to the government's own CPI calculators, it takes \$2.65
today to purchase what cost one dollar in 1980. And since its creation
in 1913, the Federal Reserve has presided over a 98% decline in the
dollar's purchasing power. The average American family sees the price
of milk, eggs, and meat increasing, while packaged household goods
decrease in size rather than price.

Loose fiscal policy has failed to create jobs also. Consider that we
had a \$700 billion TARP program, nearly \$1 trillion in stimulus
spending, a government takeover of General Motors, and hundreds of
billions of dollars of guarantees to Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, HUD,
FDIC, etc. On top of those programs the Federal Reserve has provided
over \$4 trillion worth of assistance over the past few years through
its credit facilities, purchases of mortgage-backed securities, and now
its second round of quantitative easing. Yet even after all these
trillions of dollars of spending and bailouts, total nonfarm payroll
employment is still seven million jobs lower than it was before this
crisis began.

In this same period of time, the total U.S. population has increased by
nine million people. We would expect that roughly four million of these
people should have been employed, so we are really dealing with eleven
million fewer employed people than would otherwise be expected.

It should not be surprising that monetary policy is ineffective at
creating actual jobs. It is the effects of monetary policy itself that
cause the boom and bust of the business cycle that leads to swings in
the unemployment rate. By lowering interest rates through its loose
monetary policy, the Fed spurs investment in long-term projects that
would not be profitable at market-determined interest rates. Everything
seems to go well for awhile until businesses realize that they cannot
sell their newly-built houses, their inventories of iron ore, or their
new cars. Until these resources are redirected, often with great
economic pain for all involved, true economic recovery cannot begin.

Over \$4 trillion in bailout facilities and outright debt monetization,
combined with interest rates near zero for over two years, have not and
will not contribute to increased employment. What is needed is
liquidation of debt and malinvested resources. Pumping money into the
same sectors that have just crashed merely prolongs the crisis. Until
we learn the lesson that jobs are produced through real savings and
investment and not through the creation of new money, we are doomed to
repeat this boom and bust cycle.
