---
title: Beware the Coming Bailouts of Europe
author: Ron Paul
date: December 19, 2011

layout: page
---

The economic establishment in this country has come to the conclusion
that it is not a matter of "if" the United States must intervene in the
bailout of the euro, but simply a question of "when" and "how".
Newspaper articles and editorials are full of assertions that the
breakup of the euro would result in a worldwide depression, and that
economic assistance to Europe is the only way to stave off this
calamity. These assertions are yet again more scare-mongering, just as
we witnessed during the depths of the 2008 financial crisis. After just
a decade of the euro, people have forgotten that Europe functioned for
centuries without a common currency.

The real cause of economic depression is loose monetary policy: the
creation of money and credit out of thin air and the monetization of
government debt by a central bank. This inflationary monetary policy is
the cause of every boom and bust, yet it is precisely what political
and economic elites both in Europe and the United States are
prescribing as a resolution for the present crisis. The drastic next
step being discussed is a multi-trillion dollar bailout of Europe by
the European Central Bank, aided by the IMF and the Federal Reserve.

The euro was built on an unstable foundation. Its creators attempted to
establish a dollar-like currency for Europe, while forgetting that it
took nearly two centuries for the dollar to devolve from a defined unit
of silver to a completely unbacked fiat currency note. The euro had no
such history and from the outset was a purely fiat system, thus it is
not surprising to followers of Austrian economics that it barely
survived a decade and is now completely collapsing. Europe's economic
depression is the result of the euro's very structure, a fiat money
system that allowed member governments to spend themselves into
oblivion and expect that someone else would pick up the tab.

A bailout of European banks by the European Central Bank and the
Federal Reserve will exacerbate the crisis rather than alleviate it.
What is needed is for bad debts to be liquidated. Banks that invested
in sovereign debt need to take their losses rather than socializing
those losses and prolonging the process of adjusting their balance
sheets to reflect reality. If this was done, the correction would be
painful, but quick, like tearing off a large band-aid, but this is
necessary to get back on solid economic footing. Until the correction
takes place there can be no recovery. Bailing out profligate European
governments will only ensure that no correction will take place.

A multi-trillion dollar European aid package cannot be undertaken by
Europe alone, and will require IMF and Federal Reserve involvement. The
Federal Reserve already has pumped trillions of dollars into the US
economy with nothing to show for it. Just considering Fed involvement
in Europe is ludicrous. The US economy is in horrible shape precisely
because of too much government debt and too much money creation and the
European economy is destined to flounder for the same reasons. We have
an unsustainable amount of debt here at home; it is hardly fair to US
taxpayers to take on Europe's debt as well. That will only ensure an
accelerated erosion of the dollar and a lower standard of living for
all Americans.
