---
title: No-Fly Won't Fly Constitutionally
author: Ron Paul
date: March 14, 2011

layout: page
---

Last week we once again heard numerous voices calling for intervention
in Libya. Most say the US should establish a "no-fly" zone over Libya,
pretending that it is a benign, virtually cost-free action, and the
least we could do to assist those trying to oust the Gaddaffi regime.
Let us be clear about one thing: for the US to establish a "no fly"
zone over all or part of Libya would constitute an act of war against
Libya. Establishing any kind of military presence in the sovereign
territory of Libya will require committing troops to engage in combat
against the Libyan air force, as well as anti-aircraft systems. The
administration has stated that nothing is off the table as they discuss
US responses to the unrest. This sort of talk is alarming on so many
levels. Does this mean a nuclear strike is on the table? Apparently so.

In this case, I would like to make sure we actually follow the black
letter of the law provided in the Constitution that explicitly grants
Congress the sole authority to declare war. This week I will introduce
a concurrent resolution in the House to remind my colleagues and the
administration that Congress alone, not the president, decides when to
go to war. It is alarming how casually the administration talks about
initiating acts of war, as though Article 1 Section 8 of the
Constitution does not exist. Frankly, it is not up to the President
whether or not we intervene in Libya, or set up "no-fly" zones, or send
troops. At least, it is not if we follow the Constitution. Even by the
loose standards of the War Powers Resolution, which cedes far too much
power to the president, he would have no authority to engage in
hostilities because we have not been attacked – not by Gaddafi, and not
by the rebels. This is not our fight. If the administration wants to
make it our fight, let them make their case before Congress and put it
to a vote. I would strongly oppose such a measure, but that is the
proper way to proceed.

Constitutional questions aside, Congress also needs to consider the
interests of the American people. Again, we have not been attacked.
Whatever we may think about the Gaddafi regime, we must recognize that
the current turmoil in Libya represents an attempted coup d’etat in a
foreign country. Neither the coup leaders nor the regime pose an
imminent threat to the United States and therefore, as much as we abhor
violence and loss of life, this is simply none of our business. How can
we commit our men and women in uniform to a dangerous military
operation in Libya when they swore an oath to protect and defend the
Constitution? We must also understand that our intervention will
undermine the legitimacy of whatever government prevails in Libya.
Especially if it is a bad government, it will be seen as our puppet and
further radicalize people in the region against us. These are terrible
reasons to put our soldiers’ lives at risk.

Finally we need to consider the economic cost. We don’t have the money
for more military interventions overseas. We don’t have the money for
our current military interventions overseas. We have to rely on the
Fed’s printing presses and our ability to borrow from China to fund
these wars. That alone should put an end to any discussion about
getting involved in Libya’s civil war.
