---
title: Debt Ceiling Drama
author: Ron Paul
date: July 18, 2011

layout: page
---

The debt ceiling debate is providing plenty of opportunity for
political theater in Washington. Proponents of raising the debt ceiling
are throwing around the usual scare tactics and misinformation in order
to intimidate opponents into accepting more debt and taxes. It is
important to distinguish the truth from the propaganda.

First of all, politicians need to understand that without real change
default is inevitable. In fact, default happens every day through
monetary policy tricks. Every time the Federal Reserve engages in more
quantitative easing and devalues the dollar, it is defaulting on the
American people by eroding their purchasing power and inflating their
savings away. The dollar has lost nearly 50% of its value against gold
since 2008. The Fed claims inflation is 2% or less over the past few
years; however economists who compile alternate data show a 9%
inflation rate if calculated more traditionally. Alarmingly, the
administration is talking about changing the methodology of the CPI
calculation yet again to hide the damage of the government's policies.
Changing the CPI will also enable the government to avoid giving
seniors a COLA (cost of living adjustment) on their social security
checks, and raise taxes via the hidden means of "bracket creep." This
is a default. Just because it is a default on the people and not the
banks and foreign holders of our debt does not mean it doesn't count.

Politicians also need to acknowledge that our debt is unsustainable.
For decades our government has been spending and promising far more
than it collects in taxes. But the problem is not that the people are
not taxed enough. The government has managed to run up \$61.6 trillion
in unfunded liabilities, which works out to \$528,000 per household. A
tax policy that would aim to extract even half that amount of money
from American families would be unimaginably draconian, and not unlike
attempting to squeeze blood from a turnip. This is, unequivocally, a
spending problem brought about by a dramatically inflated view of the
proper role of government in a free society.

Perhaps the most abhorrent bit of chicanery has been the threat that if
a deal is not reached to increase the debt by August 2nd, social
security checks may not go out. In reality, the Chief Actuary of Social
Security confirmed last week that current Social Security tax receipts
are more than enough to cover current outlays. The only reason those
checks would not go out would be if the administration decided to spend
those designated funds elsewhere. It is very telling that the
administration would rather frighten seniors dependent on social
security checks than alarm their big banking friends, who have already
received \$5.3 trillion in bailouts, stimulus and quantitative easing.
This instance of trying to blackmail Congress into tax increases by
threatening social security demonstrates how scary it is to be
completely dependent on government promises and why many young people
today would jump at the chance to opt out of Social Security altogether.

We are headed for rough economic times either way, but the longer we
put it off, the greater the pain will be when the system implodes. We
need to stop adding more programs and entitlements to the problem. We
need to stop expensive bombing campaigns against people on the other
side of the globe and bring our troops home. We need to stop allowing
secretive banking cartels to endlessly enslave us through monetary
policy trickery. And we need to drastically rethink government's role
in our lives so we can get it out of the way and get back to work.
