---
title: Competing Currencies - a Defense Against Profligate Government Spending
author: Ron Paul
date: July 11, 2011
---

The end of June marked what is hopefully the end of the Federal
Reserve's policy of quantitative easing. For months the Fed has
purchased hundreds of billions of dollars of Treasury debt, enabling
the government to fund its profligate deficit spending, push the
national debt to its limit, and further devalue the dollar. Confidence
in the dollar is plummeting, confidence in the euro has been shattered
by the European bond crisis, and beleaguered consumers and investors
are slowly but surely awakening to the fact that government-issued
currencies do not hold their value.

Currency is sound only when it is recognized and accepted as such by
individuals, through the actions of the market, without coercion.
Throughout history, gold and silver have been the two commodities that
have most fully satisfied the requirements of sound money. This is why
people around the world are flocking once again to gold and silver as a
store of value to replace their rapidly depreciating paper currencies.
Even central banks have come to their senses and have begun to stock up
on gold once again.

But in our country today, attempting to use gold and silver as money is
severely punished, regardless of the fact that it is the only
constitutionally-allowed legal tender! In one recent instance,
entrepreneurs who attempted to create their own gold and silver
currency were convicted by the federal government of "counterfeiting".
Also, consider another case of an individual who was convicted of tax
evasion for paying his employees with silver and gold coins rather than
fiat paper dollars. The federal government acknowledges that such coins
are legal tender at their face value, as they were issued by the U.S.
government. But when it comes to income taxes owed by the employees who
received them, the IRS suddenly deems the coins to be worth their full
market value as precious metals.

These cases highlight the fact that a government monopoly on the
issuance of money is purely a method of central control over the
economy. If you can be forced to accept the government's increasingly
devalued dollar, there is no limit to how far the government will go to
debauch the currency. Anyone who attempts to create a market based
currency-- meaning a currency with real value as determined by
markets-- threatens to embarrass the federal government and expose the
folly of our fiat monetary system. So the government destroys
competition through its usual tools of arrest, confiscation, and
incarceration.

This is why I have taken steps to restore the constitutional monetary
system envisioned and practiced by our Founding Fathers. I recently
introduced HR 1098, the Free Competition in Currency Act. This bill
eliminates three of the major obstacles to the circulation of sound
money: federal legal tender laws that force acceptance of Federal
Reserve Notes; "counterfeiting" laws that serve no purpose other than
to ban the creation of private commodity currencies; and tax laws that
penalize the use of gold and silver coins as money. During this
Congress I hope to hold hearings on this bill in order to highlight the
importance of returning to a sound monetary system.

Allowing market participants to choose a sound currency will ensure
that individuals' needs are met, rather than the needs of the
government. Restoring sound money will restrict the ability of the
government to reduce the citizenry's purchasing power and burden future
generations with debt. Unlike the current system which benefits the Fed
and its banking cartel, all Americans are better off with a sound
currency.
