---
title: S&P States the Obvious
author: Ron Paul
date: August 15, 2011

layout: default
---

Politicians did not get much time to pat themselves on the back for
supposedly rescuing the economy with the debt limit deal last week. The
ink was barely dry when Standard & Poor's downgraded the US debt
ratings anyway, roiling world financial markets. Anyone who has taken
an honest look at the government's fiscal situation, taken into account
how Washington works and the direction it is going would have a very
difficult time arguing with S&P's decision, although a strong case can
be made that this was too incremental a downgrade and that it took far
too long for S&P to admit the obvious.

Nonetheless, the administration nitpicked over a \$2 trillion
"mistake". S&P rejoined with the fact that \$2 trillion here or there
hardly makes a difference in the time frame under discussion. That, if
nothing else, should tell you the magnitude of the problem. \$2
trillion has become a drop in the bucket.

S&P cited Congress's inability to act like grownups and make necessary,
meaningful cuts, which is true. I must take issue however, with their
suggestion that tax increases are part of the answer. Taking capital
out of the private sector, where it can create real value in the form
of new jobs and products, and instead giving it to Washington to waste
and squander is not the solution. Tax increases may seem penny-wise to
some, but in reality they would be very pound-foolish. The government
currently takes in \$2.2 trillion in taxes per year, which is far too
much already. It spends \$3.7 trillion, which is ridiculous and
criminal. The problem is runaway government spending, not the American
people having too much money.

And yet we can't even have a serious discussion about bringing our
troops home and ending our expensive occupations around the world â€“
things the president used to claim to favor!

Even without this downgrade, major investors are waking up to what lies
down the road for the United States in fiscal terms. China is showing
more signs of losing its taste for our debt. Others are following suit.
What we are about to see is the end of the dollar as the reserve
currency of the world. When that happens, we will no longer be in a
position to have pretend debates about things we *probably* *should*
spend a little bit less on - we will be forced to implement serious
spending cuts as our sources of credit dry up. Of course, we can try to
postpone the day of reckoning by printing more money but the resulting
"inflation tax" will be far worse than a reduction in government
benefits.

Hyperinflation devastates the middle class. After Weimar Germany
hyper-inflated their currency in the 1920s, an entire life savings
couldn't buy a postage stamp. The bank wouldn't even send customers a
check for all the money they had saved their whole lives. It wasn't
worth the paper it was printed on or the stamp to send it. This is what
is meant when it is said that the middle class gets wiped out. The
pieces for this to happen here are all falling into place, and have
been since 1971. The only way to avoid that sort of chaos now is for
Congress to immediately reduce federal spending and take the
Constitution seriously again. The welfare/warfare state will end either
way, but winding it down responsibly is a far better way to do it.
