---
title: Foreign Occupation Leads to More Terror
author: Ron Paul
date: September 12, 2011
---

Ten years ago shocking and horrific acts of terrorism were carried out
on US soil, taking over 3,000 innocent American lives. Without a doubt,
this action demanded retaliation and retribution. However, much has
been done in the name of protecting the American people from terrorism
that has reduced our prosperity and liberty and even made us less safe.
This is ironic and sad, considering that the oft-repeated line
concerning the reasoning behind the attacks is that they hate us for
who we are - a free, prosperous people - and that we must not under any
circumstances allow the terrorists to win.

Though it is hard for many to believe, honest studies show that the
real motivation behind the September 11 attacks and the vast majority
of other instances of suicide terrorism is not that our enemies are
bothered by our way of life. Neither is it our religion, or our wealth.
Rather, it is primarily occupation. If you were to imagine for a moment
how you would feel if another country forcibly occupied the United
States, had military bases and armed soldiers present in our hometowns,
you might begin to understand why foreign occupation upsets people so
much. Robert Pape has extensively researched this issue and goes in
depth in his book "Cutting the Fuse: The Explosion of Global Suicide
Terrorism and How to Stop It". In fact, of 2,200 incidents of suicide
attacks he has studied worldwide since 1980, 95% were in response to
foreign occupation.

Pape notes that before our invasion of Iraq, only about 10% of suicide
terrorism was aimed at Americans or American interests. Since, then
however, not only is suicide terrorism greatly on the rise, but 91% of
it is now directed at us.

Yes, the attacks of 9/11 deserved a response. But the manner in which
we responded has allowed radicals in the Muslim world to advance a very
threatening narrative about us and our motivation in occupying their
lands. Osama bin Laden referred to us as "crusaders" with a religious
agenda to convert Muslims, westernize their culture and take control of
their resources. If we had targeted our response to only the thugs and
criminals who attacked us, and refrained from invading countries that
had nothing to do with it, this characterization would seem less
plausible to the desperate and displaced. Blaming Islam alone is
grossly misleading.

Instead, we chose a course of action that led to the further loss of
8,000 American lives, left 40,000 wounded and has hundreds of thousands
seeking help at the Veterans Administration. We are three to four
trillion dollars poorer. Our military is spread dangerously thin around
the globe, at the expense of protection here at home. Not only that,
but we have allowed our freedoms to be greatly threatened and
undermined from within. The Patriot Act, warrantless searches and
wiretapping, abuse of habeus corpus, useless and humiliating searches
at airports are just a few examples of how we've allowed the terrorists
to "win" by making our country less free.

Suicide terrorism did not exist in Iraq before we got there. Now it
does. There are no known instances of Iranians committing suicide
terrorism. If we invade and occupy Iran, expect that to change, too.

Sometimes it can be very uncomfortable to ask the right questions and
face the truth. When a slick politician comes along and gives a much
more soothing, self-congratulating version of events, it is very
tempting to simply believe what we would like to hear. But listening to
lies does not make us safer, even though it might make us feel better
about ourselves.

The truth is that ending these misguided wars and occupations will make
us safer, more prosperous and more free.
