---
title: Recipe for a Successful 2011
author: Ron Paul
date: January 4, 2011

layout: page
---

The year 2011 brings in a host of opportunities and challenges to
America. Will we accelerate toward economic insolvency by continuing the
policies that have created this crisis, or will a new Congress elected
on the energy of the Tea Party movement find the courage to change
course?

With the new Republican majority in the House I will have the
opportunity as a subcommittee chairman to take a careful look at our
domestic monetary policy. I am excited by the prospect of real oversight
of the Federal Reserve, but I also hope to focus on the important ways
in which our foreign policy and monetary policy are related. Just last
week the *Financial Times* reported that the limited oversight of the
Federal Reserve allowed by the passage of a watered-down version of my
Audit the Fed bill revealed that approximately 55 percent of the loans
made available under the largest Federal Reserve bailout program, the
Term Auction Facility, went to foreign banks! This is but one example of
the real cost to Americans of maintaining its empire overseas, and it
cries out for more transparency and oversight.

This is why it is key for us to understand that our foreign policy and
current economic crisis go hand in hand. Some have promised to lead us
back to fiscal responsibility while asserting that any reduction in our
foreign and military spending is off the table. They would like us to
believe that we should not only continue spending as much on the
military as the rest of the world combined, but they actually call for
an even more aggressive US policy abroad. They believe we should
continue to bomb Pakistan, Yemen, Afghanistan, and elsewhere; that we
must impose even more crippling sanctions on countries like Iran while
moving steadily on to yet another Middle East war that is not in our
interest. They represent the failed policies of the past and they would
like to lead us down a dead-end street. We must resist the temptation of
their neo-con inspired scare-mongering.

There will be much work for us to do in the next year and in the next
Congress. We need look no further than the grossly unconstitutional and
immoral policies of the Transportation Security Administration –
demanding that we either be irradiated or fondled to travel in our own
country – to see that those who would deprive us of our civil liberties
on the empty promise of full security will not be giving up easily. We
must continue standing up to them and we must not compromise. We must
not allow the out-of-control Department of Homeland Security to impose
an East German-like police state in the US, where neighbors are
encouraged by big brother or big sister to inform on their neighbors. We
must not accept that government authorities should hector us via
television screens as we go about our private lives like we are living
in Orwell’s 1984. 

I am optimistic that the incoming Members of Congress understand the
importance of what they have been entrusted with by the American people.
But I do hope that those who elected them will watch their actions --
and their votes in Congress – carefully. An early indication will be the
upcoming vote on re-authorization of the anti-American PATRIOT Act.
Defeat once and for all of this police-state legislation will be a great
way to start 2011 and the 112th Congress.  We must move ahead with
confidence. Our numbers are growing.

Happy New Year!
