---
title: Strange Definitions of War and Peace
author: Ron Paul
date: June 20, 2011
---

Last week I joined six Republican and three Democrat colleagues to file
a lawsuit against the Obama administration over its illegal war against
Libya. Now that more than 90 days have passed since the president began
bombing Libya, no one can seriously claim that the administration has
complied with the clear requirements of the 1973 War Powers Resolution.

In a remarkable act of chutzpah, the administration sent to Congress
its response to the growing concern over its abuse of war powers. Its
argument, in a nutshell, is that the War Powers Resolution is not
relevant because US armed forces are not actually engaged in
hostilities because Libya is so militarily weak it cannot fight back!
This explanation would be laughable if not so horrific. The
administration wants us to believe that there is no real violence
because the victim cannot fight back? Imagine if this standard was
applied to criminal law in the United States! I am sure Libyans on the
receiving end of US and NATO bombs feel hostilities are quite
definitely taking place.

We must recall the origins of these attacks on Libya. The Obama
administration made no claim that Libyan leader Gaddafi was killing his
civilian population. Rather, the claim was that Libya might begin
killing its civilians in the future. One need not defend Gaddafi's
regime -- and I most certainly do not -- to object to this flimsy and
dangerous rationale for violating the sovereignty of another country.
Imagine a scenario where the UN approves military action against the
United States as a preventative humanitarian measure over US
enforcement of its immigration laws, for example!

Now in Libya we see the possible use of depleted uranium shells, we see
infrastructure destroyed, we see universities bombed, we see all the
"collateral damage." Yet, this is a "humanitarian intervention"?

In our lawsuit against the administration, among other critical issues
we are demanding that the courts provide relief and protection to the
country from the administration's policy that a president may commit
the United States to a war under the authority of the United Nations
and NATO without authorization from Congress, and that previously
appropriated funds by Congress may be used for an unconstitutional and
unauthorized war in Libya or other countries. These are fundamental
Constitutional issues and I expect the judicial branch to treat our
challenge with the same level of gravity as we do in the legislative
branch.

Remember, we were told that this attack would last "days, not weeks"
and we are already three months and likely nearly a billion dollars
into it. As the bombings obviously target Gaddafi's houses, even
killing some of his family members, we can see that the real goal is
regime change rather than protection of civilians. Do we know much
about the rebels whose side we have taken in what is, in fact, a civil
war?

Although it is a bit late, I am pleased to see that congressional
leadership has started to listen to our constituents, who are solidly
against this war on Libya. I commend Speaker Boehner's expressions of
dissatisfaction with the administration over this war and I sincerely
hope he will use the full constitutional authority granted to the
legislative branch to bring into check an administration clearly out of
control.

Polls show that the American people increasingly favor a truly
conservative foreign policy: one that rejects the leftist, utopian
doctrines of nation building and preemptive war, and one that is NOT
funded by debt. Forcing the Obama administration to obey the clear
letter of the law is one step towards restoring a traditional,
patriotic foreign policy that serves American interests.
