---
title: The Milk Police
author: Ron Paul
date: May 16, 2011

layout: default
---

On April 20th, after a year-long undercover sting operation, armed
federal agents acting on behalf of the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) raided the business of Pennsylvanian Amish farmer Dan Allgyer to
prevent him from selling his unpasteurized milk to willing,
fully-informed customers in Maryland. Federal agents wasted a whole
year and who knows how many of our tax dollars posing as customers in
order to catch Allgyer committing the "crime" of selling his milk. He
was not tricking people into buying it, he was not forcing people to
purchase it, and there had been no complaints about his product. These
were completely voluntary transactions, but ones that our nanny-state
federal government did not approve of, and so they shut down his
business. The arrogance of the FDA and so many other federal agencies
is simply appalling. These types of police state raids on peaceful
businessmen, so reminiscent of our tyrannical federal drug war, have no
place in a free society.

The FDA claims its regulatory powers over food safety give it the
authority to ban the interstate sales of raw milk, but this is an
unconstitutional misapplication of the commerce clause for legislative
ends. As we have seen, if the executive branch feels hamstrung by the
fact that our framers placed lawmaking authority in the Legislative
Branch, they simply make their own laws and call them "regulations." We
all know how the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) uses such bogus
regulation authority to harass, hinder, and shut down countless other
legitimate businesses. Sadly, Congress has been far too lax for far too
long as the executive branch continues to encroach on its areas of
responsibility and thereby undermines our system of government.

Most Americans understand that if you don't want to drink unpasteurized
milk you simply do not buy it. But the federal government solution is
pre-dawn raids which destroy the livelihoods of honest, hardworking
families in this time of continued economic hardship.

I am outraged by this raid and the many others like it, and that is why
last week I introduced HR 1830, a bill to allow the shipment and
distribution of unpasteurized milk and milk products for human
consumption across state lines. This legislation removes the
unconstitutional restraint on farmers who wish to sell or otherwise
distribute, and people who wish to consume, unpasteurized milk and milk
products.

Many Americans have done their own research and come to the conclusion
that unpasteurized milk is healthier than pasteurized milk. These
Americans have the right to consume these products without having the
federal government second-guess their judgment or thwart their wishes.
If there are legitimate concerns about the safety of unpasteurized
milk, those concerns should be addressed at the state and local level.

I am hoping my colleagues in the House will join me in promoting
individual rights, the original intent of the Constitution, and
federalism by cosponsoring this legislation to allow the interstate
shipment of unpasteurized milk and milk products for human consumption.

If we are not even free anymore to decide something as basic as what we
wish to eat or drink, how much freedom do we really have left?
