---
title: On Gun Control and Violence
author: Ron Paul
date: January 17, 2011
---

The terrible violence in Arizona last weekend prompted much national
discussion on many issues. All Americans are united in their sympathies
for the victims and their families. All wonder what could motivate such
a horrible act. However, some have attempted to use this tragedy to
discredit philosophical adversaries or score political points. This
sort of opportunism is simply despicable.

We are fortunate to live in a society where violence is universally
denounced. Not one public official or commentator has attempted to
justify this reprehensible act, yet the newspapers, internet, and
airwaves are full of people trying to claim it was somehow motivated by
someone elseâ€™s political rhetoric. Most disturbing are the calls to use
government power to censor certain forms of speech, and even outlaw
certain types of criticism of public officials. This was the completely
apolitical act of a violent and disturbed man. How sad that the
attempted murder of the Congresswoman who had just read the First
Amendment on the House floor would be used in efforts to chill free
speech! Perhaps some would feel safer if the Alien and Sedition Acts
were reinstated.

Also troubling are the renewed calls for stricter gun control laws, and
for government to "do something" to somehow prevent similar incidents
in the future. This always seems to be the knee jerk reaction to any
crime committed with a gun. Nonsensical proposals to outlaw guns around
federal officials and install bulletproof barriers in the congressional
gallery only reinforce the growing perception that politicians view
their own lives as far more important than the lives of ordinary
citizens. Politicians and a complicit media have conditioned many
citizens to view government as our protector, leading to more demands
for government action whenever tragedies occur. But this impulse is at
odds with the best American traditions of self-reliance and
individualism, and it also leads to bad laws and the loss of liberty.

Remember - liberty only has meaning if we still believe in it when
terrible things happen and more government security is demanded.
Government cannot make us safe by mandating security any more than it
can make us prosperous by decreeing an end to poverty.

We need to reaffirm the core American value of individual
responsibility. Consider the young man who had the courage to tackle
the shooter and prevent further carnage because he himself had a
concealed weapon. Without that gun, he could have been yet another
sitting duck. When peaceful citizens are armed, they at least have a
chance against armed criminals.

Advocates of gun control would urge us to leave our safety to law
enforcement, but eyewitness reports indicate it took police as much as
20 minutes to arrive on the scene that day! Since police cannot be
everywhere all of the time, a large part of our personal safety depends
on our ability to defend ourselves.

Our constitutional right to bear arms does not create a society without
risks of violent crime, and neither would the strictest gun control
laws. Guns and violence are a fact of life. The question is whether it
is preferable to be defenseless while waiting for the police, or to
have the option to arm yourself. We certainly know criminals prefer the
former.
