---
title: Budget Cuts are Meaningless Without Fed Transparency
author: Ron Paul
date: April 18, 2011
---

Congress focused on issues surrounding government spending this week as
talk of deficits, the national debt, and the debt limit saturated the
airwaves. This is a positive development. In years past, there was very
little concern over how much was spent here in Washington, how it was
spent, or how much of our gross domestic product was being consumed by
government. That blissful ignorance naturally resulted in decades of
government spending with impunity, bringing us to where we are today:
trillions in debt with astronomical entitlement obligations that will
be impossible to fulfill in the not too distant future. So it is a good
thing that there is so much political pressure now on our leaders to
actually put the brakes on runaway spending.

However, even the most generous estimate of the spending cut passed
this week – \$38.5 billion – is a paltry 3.5% of the \$1.05 trillion in
spending through the next 5 months. This hardly makes a dent in our
government's mountain of debt. Even worse than that, the non-partisan
Congressional Budget Office (CBO) stripped away the accounting sleights
of hand and scored it as only \$352 million in cuts, which works out to
less than half of one percent of spending. Still, the tiniest cut is
better than the massive increases we have become accustomed to in
federal budgets.

Of course, our disastrous wars in Afghanistan and Iraq are not even
included in this budget as they are considered emergency spending. They
constitute \$3.3 billion in spending in the same period of time, so
they more than cancel out any small cuts the warmongers may crow about.

I voted against the legislation funding government for the remainder of
this year, as well as next year's budget because, as in years past,
government spends far too much on unconstitutional programs. In spite
of any rhetoric about fiscal responsibility, a point three percent
(0.3%) cut does not suddenly make the rest of the spending
constitutional or responsible. And, if the American people do not
continue to hold the politicians' feet to the fire, you can be sure we
will see massive spending increases again in the future.

In addition to Congress' spending, many Americans are finally paying
attention to the spending done by unelected banking cronies at the
Federal Reserve. Recently the Fed was forced to reveal some details of
loans given out during the financial crisis of 2008 and they are truly
shocking. Matt Taibbi points out in a recent Rolling Stone article that
two very well-connected Wall Street wives got together and formed a
real estate investment company that garnered \$220 million in so-called
"loans" (free money) from the Fed. Compare this number to the \$352
million in spending cuts the CBO says are in the current budget! A few
months later, one of the wives bought a \$13.5 million personal
residence with her husband, the CEO of Morgan Stanley.

The unelected, unaccountable Fed hands out as much or more money this
way as our federal government spends, and yet receives hardly any
attention. This is why I believe transparency of the Fed is a critical
step to regaining control of our financial situation in this country.
We can never get meaningful reforms if all eyes are on the \$352
million so-called cuts, and transactions like the \$220 million given
to Wall Street cronies are done in the shadows. This is why I have
reintroduced my Audit the Fed bill to this Congress. HR 1207 is now HR
459 and is essential to true fiscal reform and responsibility.
