---
title: Trust Us; We're the Government
author: Ron Paul
date: February 6, 2012

layout: page
---

While much has been made recently of the President's unconstitutional
appointment of Richard Cordray to be director of the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau (CFPB), lost in the hubbub has been any discussion of
the unconstitutionality of, or the need for, the CFPB itself. Proponents
of the CFPB claim that this new bureaucracy will help consumers by
protecting them from fraudulent activity. In reality, it will only
expose consumers to more financial harm.

Housed within the unconstitutional Federal Reserve, and funded not
through Congressional appropriations but through the Federal Reserve's
interest revenue off the trillions of dollars of US government debt it
holds, the structure of the CFPB ensures that it is run by unelected,
unaccountable bureaucrats, with no effective oversight from Congress.
Given broad power to regulate the activities not only of banks, but also
of any other entity which the government deems offers a financial
product, there is almost no limit to the scope of financial activities
which the CFPB can oversee.

Giving impetus to the CFPB's creation was the poor reputation of Wall
Street banks and financial firms that developed as a result of the
financial crisis. Banks which received trillions of dollars of
taxpayer-funded bailouts turned around and shafted their customers by
foreclosing on homes, raising credit card interest rates, and
introducing numerous new fees.

But rather than keeping Wall Street in check as its proponents allege,
the CFPB will end up placing further restrictions on the ability of Main
Street Americans to engage in productive financial endeavors. Current
law already allows only the richest Americans to invest in potentially
lucrative ventures such as hedge funds because such investments are
deemed to be "too risky" for the average American to invest in. The
government in its paternalistic wisdom treats American investors as too
stupid to know what to do with their own money, and "protects" them,
supposedly, by keeping them poorer than they otherwise would be. We can
expect even more of this once the CFPB is running in full stride.

The CFPB will further harm consumers by encouraging them to use only
financial products which have received the Bureau's approval. Many
consumers will assume that these products are "safe", and will fail to
engage in their own due diligence, with predictably unfortunate results.
We have seen this with the stock markets and the cases of Bernie Madoff
and Allen Stanford, where investors trusting the SEC to prevent fraud
ended up suffering huge losses. Social Security is a similar case, in
which millions of people placed their trust in the government to take
care of them in their old age. The inability of Social Security to pay
its future obligations is well understood but ignored, and millions of
Americans will likely once again learn the hard way that the government
cannot be taken at its word.
