---
title: Capital Controls Have No Place in a Free Society
author: Ron Paul
date: May 29, 2012
---

The characteristic mark of a tyrannical regime is that it eventually
finds it necessary to erect walls to keep people from leaving.  This is
why we should be troubled by the "Ex-PATRIOT Act," an egregiously
offensive bill recently introduced in the Senate.  Following a long line
of recent legislation and regulations attempting to expropriate more and
more wealth from hard-working Americans, this new bill spits in the face
of overburdened taxpayers and tramples on the Constitution. 

Current law already dictates that Americans with a net worth of over \$2
million who expatriate must be assumed to have sold all their assets and
must pay a corresponding punitive exit tax on those assumed sales.  The
Ex-PATRIOT Act goes even further than current law by assessing a 30%
capital gains tax on all **future**earnings of expatriates.  Not content
just with this additional tax, the bill also grants the IRS the sole
authority to determine whether individuals have expatriated for tax
purposes and allows the IRS to bar those individuals
from **ever** re-entering the United States.  Finally, the bill
blatantly violates the ex post facto provisions of the U.S. Constitution
by extending all of these provisions to anyone who has given up their
U.S. citizenship within the past decade.  

This bill, and other similar legislation, casts a chilling effect on
saving, investment, and entrepreneurial activity.  The bill was
introduced in response to news reports about one of the founders of
Facebook who might save millions of dollars of taxes by renouncing his
U.S. citizenship.  But in their blind envy towards successful
entrepreneurs, the bill's sponsors ignore the fact that they will
ensnare many ordinary middle-class Americans who work hard, save and
invest wisely, and benefit from rising home values.  These Americans may
easily find themselves pushing past the \$2 million mark by the time
they retire, especially as inflation continues to seriously accelerate. 
If they wish to escape the Federal Reserve's inflation by emigrating to
lower-cost countries so their dollars will go farther, as many Baby
Boomers are starting to do, the federal government will penalize them,
and continue to penalize them for the rest of their lives as long as
they hold any money in the United States. 

Unfortunately, the mere consideration of such legislation, even before
it has passed, has made American banking customers a potential future
headache for banks around the world.  They don't want to deal with the
IRS any more than Americans do, and if American account holders become a
Trojan horse for the IRS to insinuate themselves into their affairs,
there may be more cost than benefit to extending banking services to
Americans.

We live under a federal government that has eviscerated our Fourth
Amendment rights, that can detain U.S. citizens indefinitely based
solely on the President's word, that assaults toddlers and grandmothers
at airports in the name of security, and regulates virtually every
aspect of our economic lives.  No wonder increasing numbers of Americans
feel this government is engaged in outright warfare against its own
citizens.  Every day the noose grows tighter, yet anyone who sees the
writing on the wall and seeks to leave must pay exorbitant taxes just
for the privilege of leaving, and increasingly the possibility looms of
never fully breaking away from the government's tentacles no matter
where they go.  Ultimately, the Ex-PATRIOT Act proposes to control
people by controlling their capital, and it has no place in a free
society.
