---
title: Enduring Commitments Abroad
author: Ron Paul
date: May 7, 2012

layout: page
---

Last week President Obama made a surprise pre-dawn trip to Afghanistan
to mark the one year anniversary of the killing of Osama bin Laden and
to sign a document further extending the US presence in that country.
The president said, "we're building an enduring partnership...As you
stand up, you will not stand alone." What that means in practice is that
the US will continue its efforts to prop up the government in
Afghanistan for another ten years beyond the promised withdrawal date of
2014.

To those of us who believe the US should leave Afghanistan immediately,
the president retorted, "We must give Afghanistan the opportunity to
stabilize." But how long will that take, when we have already fought the
longest war in our nation's history at incredible human and economic
cost to the nation and no end is in sight?

There is little evidence of any sustained increase in stability in
Afghanistan and, in fact, April saw the loss of 34 more American troops
and an escalation of violence and upheaval. Within 90 minutes of the
president's departure, seven more people were killed in Kabul by a
suicide bomber. It is clear that our presence in that country is not
creating any real stability. With Osama bin Laden dead and the al Qaeda
presence in Afghanistan virtually non-existent, we are reduced to
nation-building in a nation where there is no real nation to build.

We should ask ourselves why Obama's trip was a "surprise" visit rather
than a normal state visit. The reason is that after ten years it is
still far too dangerous to travel in or out of that country. Does that
not speak much more loudly than the president's optimistic words about
the amazing progress we have made in Afghanistan?

What does our enduring commitment mean? Ask the South Koreans, where the
United States has maintained an "enduring commitment" of US troops more
than fifty years after hostilities ended. By some estimates the United
States taxpayer is saddled with a 40 billion dollar annual price tag for
our "enduring commitment" to maintaining a US military presence in
Korea. Polls suggest that particularly younger Koreans are tired of the
US military presence in their country and would prefer us to leave. The
same is true for the residents of Okinawa, who have argued strongly and
with some recent success for American troops to leave their island.

The Soviets believed the road to their goal for a universal form of
government ran through Afghanistan. They were also wrong and paid an
enormous price. However, after nine years and 15,000 Soviet lives lost,
the communist regime in Moscow realized its mistake and withdrew from
that country. The Soviet withdrawal was complete in early 1989. The
Soviet Union by that time had further plunged into economic crisis,
fueled in great part by its commitment to maintain a global empire of
client states. Later that year, the Soviet world began crashing down,
with first the collapse of Eastern European regimes and then the Soviet
Union itself. That collapse produced an economic calamity for the
successor states from which most have not yet fully recovered. It is not
too late for the United States to learn what the Soviets discovered too
late, back in 1989. Mr. President: the time to leave Afghanistan is
today, not in 2024.
