---
title: Right to Work is Part of Economic Liberty
author: Ron Paul
date: December 17, 2012

layout: page
---

Many observers were surprised when Michigan, historically a stronghold of union
power, became the nation’s 24th "Right to Work" state. The backlash from
November’s unsuccessful attempt to pass a referendum forbidding the state from
adopting a right to work law was a major factor in Michigan’s rejection of
compulsory unionism. The need for drastic action to improve Michigan’s economy,
which is suffering from years of big government policies, also influenced many
Michigan legislators to support right to work.

Let us be clear: right to work laws simply prohibit coercion. They prevent
states from forcing employers to operate as closed union shops, and thus they
prevent unions from forcing individuals to join. In many cases right to work
laws are the only remedy to federal laws which empower union bosses to impose
union dues as a condition of employment.

Right to work laws do not prevent unions from bargaining collectively with
employers, and they do not prevent individuals from forming or joining unions
if they believe it will benefit them. Despite all the hype, right to work laws
merely enforce the fundamental right to control one’s own labor.

States with right to work laws enjoy greater economic growth and a higher
standard of living than states without such laws. According to the [National
Institute for Labor Relations
Research](http://j.mp/U4bFKE
s-Benefit-August-2012web.pdf), from 2001-2011 employment in right to work
states grew by 2.4%, while employment in union states fell by 3.4%! During the
same period wages rose by 12.5% in right to work states, while rising by a mere
3.1% in union states. Clearly, "Right to Work" is good for business and labor.

Workers are best served when union leaders have to earn their membership and
dues by demonstrating the benefits they provide. Instead, unions use government
influence and political patronage. The result is bad laws that force workers to
subsidize unions and well-paid union bosses.

Of course government should not regulate internal union affairs, or interfere
in labor disputes for the benefit of employers. Government should never forbid
private-sector workers from striking. Employees should be free to join unions
or not, and employers should be able to bargain with unions or not. Labor, like
all goods and services, is best allocated by market forces rather than the
heavy, restrictive hand of government. Voluntarism works.

Federal laws forcing employees to pay union dues as a condition of getting or
keeping a job are blatantly unconstitutional. Furthermore, Congress does not
have the moral authority to grant a private third party the right to interfere
in private employment arrangements. No wonder polls report that 80 percent of
the American people believe compulsory union laws need to be changed.

Unions’ dirty little secret is that real wages cannot rise unless productivity
rises. American workers cannot improve their standard of living simply by
bullying employers with union tactics. Instead, employers, employees, and
unions must recognize that only market mechanisms can signal employment needs
and wage levels in any industry. Profits or losses from capital investment are
not illusions that can be overcome by laws or regulations; they are real-world
signals that directly affect wages and employment opportunities. Union
advocates can choose to ignore reality, but they cannot overcome the basic laws
of economics.

As always, the principle of liberty will provide the most prosperous society
possible. Right to work laws are a positive step toward economic liberty.
