---
title: Government Security is Just Another Kind of Violence
author: Ron Paul
date: December 24, 2012

layout: page
---

The senseless and horrific killings last week in Newtown, Connecticut reminded
us that a determined individual or group of individuals can cause great harm no
matter what laws are in place.  Connecticut already has restrictive gun laws
relative to other states, including restrictions on fully automatic, so-called
"assault" rifles and gun-free zones. 

Predictably, the political left responded to the tragedy with emotional calls
for increased gun control.  This is understandable, but misguided. The impulse
to have government "do something" to protect us in the wake national tragedies
is reflexive and often well intentioned.  Many Americans believe that if we
simply pass the right laws, future horrors like the Sandy Hook Elementary
shooting can be prevented.  But this impulse ignores the self evident truth
that criminals don't obey laws.   

The political right, unfortunately, has fallen into the same trap in its calls
for quick legislative solutions to gun violence.  If only we put armed police
or armed teachers in schools, we’re told, would-be school shooters will be
dissuaded or stopped. 

While I certainly agree that more guns equals less crime and that private gun
ownership prevents many shootings, I don’t agree that conservatives and
libertarians should view government legislation, especially at the federal
level, as the solution to violence.  Real change can happen only when we commit
ourselves to rebuilding civil society in America, meaning a society based on
family, religion, civic and social institutions, and peaceful cooperation
through markets.  We cannot reverse decades of moral and intellectual decline
by snapping our fingers and passing laws. 

Let’s not forget that our own government policies often undermine civil
society, cheapen life, and encourage immorality.  The president and other
government officials denounce school violence, yet still advocate for endless
undeclared wars abroad and easy abortion at home.  U.S. drone strikes kill
thousands, but nobody in America holds vigils or devotes much news coverage to
those victims, many of which are children, albeit, of a different color.

Obviously I don’t want to conflate complex issues of foreign policy and war
with the Sandy Hook shooting, but it is important to make the broader point
that our federal government has zero moral authority to legislate against
violence.

Furthermore, do we really want to live in a world of police checkpoints,
surveillance cameras, metal detectors, X-ray scanners, and warrantless physical
searches?  We see this culture in our airports: witness the shabby spectacle of
once proud, happy Americans shuffling through long lines while uniformed TSA
agents bark orders.  This is the world of government provided "security," a
world far too many Americans now seem to accept or even endorse.  School
shootings, no matter how horrific, do not justify creating an Orwellian
surveillance state in America.

Do we really believe government can provide total security?  Do we want to
involuntarily commit every disaffected, disturbed, or alienated person who
fantasizes about violence?  Or can we accept that liberty is more important
than the illusion of state-provided security? Government cannot create a world
without risks, nor would we really wish to live in such a fictional place.
Only a totalitarian society would even claim absolute safety as a worthy ideal,
because it would require total state control over its citizens’ lives.  We
shouldn’t settle for substituting one type of violence for another.
Government role is to protect liberty, not to pursue unobtainable safety.

Our freedoms as Americans preceded gun control laws, the TSA, or the Department
of Homeland Security.  Freedom is defined by the ability of citizens to live
without government interference, not by safety. It is easy to clamor for
government security when terrible things happen; but liberty is given true
meaning when we support it without exception, and we will be safer for it.
