---
title: In Praise of Price Gouging
author: Ron Paul
date: November 12, 2012

layout: default
---

As the northeastern United States continues to recover from Hurricane
Sandy, we hear the usual outcry against individuals and companies who
dare to charge market prices for goods such as gasoline. The normal
market response of rising prices in the wake of a natural disaster and
resulting supply disruptions is redefined as "price gouging." The
government claims that [price
gouging](http://j.mp/11nETr8) is the charging of
ruinous or exploitative prices for goods in short supply in the wake of
a disaster and is a [heinous
crime](http://j.mp/V7LrEI) 
But does this reflect economic reality, or merely political posturing to
capitalize on raw emotions? 

In the wake of Hurricane Sandy, the supply of gasoline was greatly
disrupted. Many gas stations were unable to pump gas due to a lack of
electricity, thus greatly reducing the supply.  At the same time demand
for gasoline spiked due to the widespread use of generators. Because gas
stations were forbidden from raising their prices to meet the increased
demand, miles-long lines developed and stations were forced to start
limiting the amount of gasoline that individuals could purchase. New
Jersey gas stations began to look like Soviet grocery stores.

Had gas stations been allowed to raise their prices to reflect the
increased demand for gasoline, only those most in need of gasoline would
have purchased gas, while everyone would have economized on their
existing supply. But because prices remained lower than they should have
been, no one sought to conserve gas.  Low prices signaled that gas was
in abundant supply, while reality was exactly the opposite, and only
those fortunate enough to be at the front of gas lines were able to
purchase gas before it sold out.  Not surprisingly, a thriving black
market developed, with gas offered for up to [\$20 per
gallon](http://j.mp/StVas5).

With price controls in effect, supply shortages were exacerbated.  If
prices had been allowed to increase to market levels, the profit
opportunity would have brought in new supplies from outside the region. 
As supplies increased, prices gradually would have decreased as supply
and demand returned to equilibrium. But with price controls in effect,
what company would want to deal with the hassle of shipping gas to a
disaster-stricken area with downed power lines and flooded highways when
the same profit could be made elsewhere?  So instead of gas shipments
flooding into the disaster zones, what little gas supply is left is
rapidly sold and consumed.

Governments fail to understand that prices are not just random numbers.
Prices perform an important role in providing information, coordinating
supply and demand, and enabling economic calculation. When government
interferes with the price mechanism, economic calamity ensues. Price
controls on gasoline led to the infamous gas lines of the 1970s, yet
politicians today repeat those same failed mistakes. Instituting price
caps at a below-market price will always lead to shortages. No act of
any legislature can reverse the laws of supply and demand. 

[History shows
us](http://j.mp/YwoTUH)
that the quickest path to economic recovery is to abolish all price
controls. If governments really want to aid recovery, they would abolish
their "price-gouging" legislation and allow the free market to function.
