---
title: War Drums for Syria?
author: Ron Paul
date: June 4, 2012

layout: page
---

War drums are beating again in Washington. This time Syria is in the
crosshairs after a massacre there last week left more than 100 dead. As
might be expected from an administration with an announced policy of
"regime change" in Syria, the reaction was to blame only the Syrian
government for the tragedy, expel Syrian diplomats from Washington, and
announce that the US may attack Syria even without UN approval. Of
course, the idea that the administration should follow the Constitution
and seek a Declaration of War from Congress is considered even more
anachronistic now than under the previous administration.

It may be the case that the Syrian military was responsible for the
events last week, but recent bombings and attacks have been carried out
by armed rebels with reported al-Qaeda ties. With the stakes so high, it
would make sense to wait for a full investigation -- unless the truth is
less important than stirring up emotions in favor of a US attack.

There is ample reason to be skeptical about US government claims
amplified in mainstream media reports. How many times recently have lies
and exaggerations been used to push for the use of force overseas? It
was not long ago that we were told Gaddafi was planning genocide for the
people of Libya, and the only way to stop it was a US attack. Those
claims turned out to be false, but by then the US and NATO had already
bombed Libya, destroying its infrastructure, killing untold numbers of
civilians, and leaving a gang of violent thugs in charge.

Likewise, we were told numerous falsehoods to increase popular support
for the 2003 war on Iraq, including salacious stories of trans-Atlantic
drones and WMDs. Advocates of war did not understand the complexities of
Iraqi society, including its tribal and religious differences. As a
result, Iraq today is a chaotic mess, with its ancient Christian
population eliminated and the economy set back decades. An unnecessary
war brought about by lies and manipulation never ends well.

Earlier still, we were told lies about genocide and massacres in Kosovo
to pave the way for President Clinton's bombing campaign against
Yugoslavia. More than 12 years later, that region is every bit as
unstable and dangerous as before the US intervention â€“ and American
troops are still there.

The story about the Syrian massacre keeps changing, which should raise
suspicions. First, we were told that the killings were caused by
government shelling, but then it was discovered that most were killed at
close range with handgun fire and knives. No one has explained why
government forces would take the time to go house to house binding the
hands of the victims before shooting them, and then retreat to allow the
rebels in to record the gruesome details. No one wants to ask or answer
the disturbing questions, but it would be wise to ask ourselves who
benefits from these stories.

We have seen media reports over the past several weeks that the Obama
administration is providing direct "non-lethal" assistance to the rebels
in Syria while facilitating the transfer of weapons from other Gulf
States. This semi-covert assistance to rebels we don't know much about
threatens to become overt intervention. Last week Gen. Martin Dempsey,
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said about Syria, "I think the
military option should be considered." And here all along I thought it
was up to Congress to decide when we go to war, not the generals.

We are on a fast track to war against Syria. It is time to put on the
brakes.
