---
title: Consequences of an Interventionist Foreign Policy
author: Ron Paul
date: September 17, 2012

layout: default
---

The attack on the US consulate in Libya and the killing of the US
Ambassador and several aides is another tragic example of how our
interventionist foreign policy undermines our national security. The
more the US tries to control the rest of the world, either by democracy
promotion, aid to foreign governments, or by bombs, the more events spin
out of control into chaos, unintended consequences, and blowback.

Unfortunately, what we saw in Libya last week is nothing new.

In 1980s Afghanistan, the US supported Islamic radicals in their efforts
to expel the invading Soviet military. These radicals became what is
known to be al-Qaeda, and our one-times allies turned on us most
spectacularly on September 11, 2001.

Iraq did not have a significant al Qaeda presence before the 2003 US
invasion, but our occupation of that country and attempt to remake it in
our image caused a massive reaction that opened the door to al Qaeda,
leading to thousands of US soldiers dead, a country destroyed, and
instability that shows no sign of diminishing.

In Libya we worked with, among others, the rebel *Libyan Fighting Group
(LIFG)* which included foreign elements of al-Qaeda. It has been pointed
out that the al-Qaeda affiliated radicals we fought in Iraq were some of
the same groups we worked with to overthrow Gaddafi in Libya. Last year
in a television interview I predicted that the result of NATO’s bombing
of Libya would likely be an increased al-Qaeda presence in the country.
I said at the time that we may be delivering al-Qaeda another prize.

Not long after NATO overthrew Gaddafi, the al Qaeda flag was flown over
the courthouse in Benghazi. Should we be surprised, then, that less than
a year later there would be an attack on our consulate in Benghazi? We
have been told for at least the past eleven years that these people are
the enemy who seeks to do us harm.

There is danger in the belief we can remake the world by bribing some
countries and bombing others. But that is precisely what the
interventionists – be they liberal or conservative – seem to believe.
When the world does not conform to their image, they seem genuinely
shocked. The secretary of state’s reaction to the attack on the US
consulate in Benghazi was one of confusion. "How could this happen in a
country we helped liberate, in a city we helped save from destruction,"
she asked.

The problem is that we do not know and we cannot know enough about these
societies we are seeking to remake. We never try to see through the eyes
of those we seek to liberate. Libya is in utter chaos, the
infrastructure has been bombed to rubble, the economy has ceased to
exist, gangs and militias rule by brutal force, the government is seen
as a completely illegitimate and powerless US puppet.  How could anyone
be shocked that the Libyans do not see our bombing their country as
saving it from destruction?

Currently, the US is actively supporting rebels in Syria that even our
CIA tells us are affiliated with al Qaeda. Many of these radical
Islamist fighters in Syria were not long ago fighting in Libya.  We must
learn from these mistakes and immediately cease all support for the
Syrian rebels, lest history once again repeat itself. We are literally
backing the same people in Syria that we are fighting in Afghanistan and
that have just killed our ambassador in Libya! We must finally abandon
the interventionist impulse before it is too late.
