---
title: Audit the Fed Headed for the House Floor!
author: Ron Paul
date: July 2, 2012

layout: page
---

Last week supporters of Federal Reserve transparency had a major victory
when the House Committee on Government Oversight and Reform passed my
Audit the Fed bill, HR 459 unanimously with all major audit provisions
intact.  This clears the way for a House floor vote expected sometime in
late July, and with a whopping 263 cosponsors, the chances of it passing
have never looked better!  This is an unprecedented opportunity for
transparency into how the currency of the United States is handled, and
mishandled by the Federal Reserve.  It is more important than ever that
my colleagues in the House and Senate understand what this legislation
does and why it is so important.

The Federal Reserve is an enormously destructive and unaccountable force
in both the U.S. economy and the greater global economy. Federal Reserve
policies affect average Americans far more than fiscal, spending, and
tax policies legislated by Congress; indeed the Fed "spends" more than
Congress when it creates trillions of new dollars on its balance sheet
to bail out favored financial institutions.

For several decades the Fed has relentlessly increased the supply of
U.S. dollars (both real and electronic) and kept interest rates
artificially low. These monetary policies punish thrift, erode the value
of savings, and harm older Americans living on fixed incomes and the
poor. The Fed's expansion of the money supply, combined with
artificially low interest rates, creates destructive cycles of
malinvestment. This results in housing, stock market, and employment
booms and busts that destroy lives.

While the Fed was created by Congress, current law prohibits Congress
from fully auditing the Fed's monetary policy - the Fed actions that
impact Americans the most. The Fed's financial statements are audited
annually, but the Fed's monetary policy operations are exempt from
audit. Congress' investigative arm, the Government Accountability Office
(GAO), currently is prohibited by law from examining discount window and
open market operations; agreements with foreign governments and central
banks; and Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) directives. It is
precisely this information that should be made public.

The audit mandated in the Dodd-Frank Act focused solely on emergency
credit programs, and only on procedural issues rather than focusing on
the substantive details of the lending transactions. Most of the data on
its other activities, such as open market operations and discount window
lending, have only been published as a result of lawsuitsâ€”not because of
Congressional action.  Dodd-Frank requires this information to be
disclosed going forward, but with a two year time lag and with GAO
restricted to auditing only the procedural components of any programs.
H.R. 459 grants GAO and Congress access without special exemptions and
ensures that ALL of the Fed's lending actions will be subject to
oversight.

Also, given the Fed's establishment of dollar swap agreements with
foreign central banks (which lent up to \$600 billion at a time in
2008), and the increasing economic uncertainty surrounding Spain, Greece
and the European Union, the Fed's continued financial assistance to
Europe should not be exempt from public accountability and Congressional
oversight. H.R. 459 brings transparency to the Fed's agreements with the
European Central Bank and other foreign entities.

H.R. 459 does not limit the focus of the audit, making a full audit
finally possible. An entity that controls the value and purchasing power
of the dollar should not be permitted to operate in the dark without
oversight by Congress and accountability to the people. The Fed needs
transparency and H.R. 459 would provide it. We now have this opportunity
to ensure solid passage of HR 459 on the House floor, then the Senate
floor and have it promptly signed into law.
