---
title: How Long Will the Dollar Remain the World's Reserve Currency?
author: Ron Paul
date: September 3, 2012

layout: page
---

We frequently hear the financial press refer to the U.S. dollar as the
"world’s reserve currency," implying that our dollar will always retain
its value in an ever shifting world economy.  But this is a dangerous
and mistaken assumption.

Since August 15, 1971, when President Nixon closed the gold window and
refused to pay out any of our remaining 280 million ounces of gold, the
U.S. dollar has operated as a pure fiat currency.  This means the dollar
became an article of faith in the continued stability and might of the
U.S. government.

In essence, we declared our insolvency in 1971.   Everyone recognized
some other monetary system had to be devised in order to bring stability
to the markets.

Amazingly, a new system was devised which allowed the U.S. to operate
the printing presses for the world reserve currency with no restraints
placed on it-- not even a pretense of gold convertibility! Realizing the
world was embarking on something new and mind-boggling, elite money
managers, with especially strong support from U.S. authorities, struck
an [agreement with
OPEC](http://j.mp/U4bFtS)
in the 1970s to price oil in U.S. dollars exclusively for all worldwide
transactions. This gave the dollar a special place among world
currencies and in essence backed the dollar with oil.

In return, the U.S. promised to protect the various oil-rich kingdoms in
the Persian Gulf against threat of invasion or domestic coup. This
arrangement helped ignite radical Islamic movements among those who
resented our influence in the region. The arrangement also gave the
dollar artificial strength, with tremendous financial benefits for the
United States. It allowed us to export our monetary inflation by buying
oil and other goods at a great discount as the dollar flourished.

In 2003, however, Iran began pricing its oil exports in Euro for Asian
and European buyers.  The Iranian government also opened an [oil
bourse](http://j.mp/U4bFtT)
in 2008 on the island of Kish in the Persian Gulf for the express
purpose of trading oil in Euro and other currencies. In 2009 Iran
completely ceased any oil transactions in U.S. dollars.  These actions
by the second largest OPEC oil producer pose a direct threat to the
continued status of our dollar as the world’s reserve currency, a threat
which partially explains our ongoing hostility toward Tehran.

While the erosion of our petrodollar agreement with OPEC certainly
threatens the dollar’s status in the Middle East, an even larger threat
resides in the Far East.  Our greatest benefactors for the last twenty
years-- Asian central banks-- have lost their appetite for holding U.S.
dollars.  China, Japan, and Asia in general have been happy to hold U.S.
debt instruments in recent decades, but they will not prop up our
spending habits forever.  Foreign central banks understand that American
leaders do not have the discipline to maintain a stable currency. 

If we act now to replace the fiat system with a stable dollar backed by
precious metals or commodities, the dollar can regain its status as the
safest store of value among all government currencies.  If not, the rest
of the world will abandon the dollar as the global reserve currency.

Both Congress and American consumers will then find borrowing a
dramatically more expensive proposition. Remember, our entire
consumption economy is based on the willingness of foreigners to hold
U.S. debt.  We face a reordering of the entire world economy if the
federal government cannot print, borrow, and spend money at a rate that
satisfies its endless appetite for deficit spending. 
