---
title: Stop Internet Censorship
author: Ron Paul
date: January 23, 2012

layout: page
---

Although Congress was back in session for scarcely more than a day last
week, private citizens across the country managed to cause an uproar
felt across Capitol Hill.  The uproar took the form of hundreds of
thousands of phone calls to both Senators and Representatives, urging
them to oppose two draconian new bills that threaten the free and
unbridled flow of information on the internet.

On Wednesday last week, dozens of prominent websites like Wikipedia,
Reddit, and Craigslist, were blacked out in protest of two bills known
in DC jargon as SOPA and PIPA.  SOPA is the House bill; PIPA is its
Senate companion. These bills ostensibly will combat internet piracy,
and of course we also are told they will help us wage the never ending
"war on terror."

What these bills actually do is force website owners to police the
internet; create entry barriers to the only relatively free and open
medium of communication; and threaten to break the technological
structure of the internet itself.  They also violate our 1st Amendment
right to freedom of speech and our 4th Amendment freedom from
unreasonable searches and seizures. 

SOPA and PIPA have been drafted not only without respect for the
Constitution, but also without an understanding of the how the internet
works.  These bills attack the very system upon which the entire orderly
organization of the web depends.  Search engines, internet service
providers, advertising sites, and sites with user-generated content such
as Facebook, YouTube, and Twitter--all magnificent creations of the
market-- are directly threatened by these bills. They will be held
responsible if even a single of their millions of users posts even one
link to a website that a copyright holder claims is violating a
copyright.

Note that under the bills as written, the Department of Justice or a
copyright holder do not have to prove that their copyright was
violated-- they simply have to claim copyright infringement and an
entire site is shut down.  The burden of these regulations on the
internet will be enormous, shifting resources away from productivity and
innovation and into monitoring and censoring.  It turns internet
companies into involuntary tools for Big Brother government, further
eroding our Constitutional rights.

As is typical of so many bills in Congress, SOPA and PIPA were not
crafted to make life better for the American people, but rather were
written at the behest of big business trying to enlist the federal
government as its strong-arm.  For example, the Motion Picture
Association of America spent more than \$1.2 million so far lobbying for
their passage.

But the internet community is fighting back effectively, not just with
websites that went black but with millions of users who expressed their
solidarity.  Congressional sponsors of both bills have been jumping ship
in response to the outrage. The House Judiciary Committee canceled the
SOPA hearing they were planning to hold last Wednesday; the House
leadership announced they have no intention of considering this bill;
and at the end of the week Senator Reid announced he was postponing the
vote until a "compromise" could be reached.  The American people are
speaking, and with their continued grassroots efforts the marketplace
for free ideas and communication will prevail over government controls
and censorship.
