---
title: The Latest Obamacare Overreach
author: Ron Paul
date: February 13, 2012
---

Many religious conservatives understandably are upset with the latest
Obamacare mandate, which will require religious employers (including
Catholic employers) to provide birth control to workers receiving
healthcare benefits.  This mandate includes certain birth control
devices that are considered abortifacients, like IUDs and the "morning
after" pill. 

Of course Catholic teachings forbid the use of any sort of contraceptive
devices, so this rule is anathema to the religious beliefs of Catholic
employers. Religious freedom always has been considered sacrosanct in
this country.  However, our federal bureaucracy increasingly forces
Americans to subsidize behaviors they find personally abhorrent, either
through agency mandates or direct transfer payments funded by tax
dollars.

Proponents of this mandate do not understand the gravity of forcing
employers to subsidize activities that deeply conflict with their
religious convictions.  Proponents also do not understand that a refusal
to subsidize those activities does not mean the employer is "denying
access" to healthcare.  If employers don't provide free food to
employees, do we accuse them of starving their workers?

In truth this mandate has nothing to do with healthcare, and everything
to do with the abortion industry and a hatred for traditional religious
values.  Obamacare apologists cannot abide any religious philosophy that
promotes large, two parent, nuclear, heterosexual families and frowns on
divorce and abortion.  Because the political class hates these values,
it feels compelled to impose—by force of law—its preferred vision of
society: single parents are noble; birth control should be encouraged at
an early age; and abortion must be upheld as an absolute moral right.

So the political class simply tells the American people and American
industry what values must prevail, and what costs much be borne to
implement those values.  This time, however, the political class has
been shocked by the uproar to the new mandate that it did not anticipate
or understand. 

But Catholic hospitals face the existential choice of obeying their
conscience and engaging in civil disobedience, or closing their doors
because government claims the power to force them to violate the
teachings of their faith.  This terrible imposition has resonated with
many Americans, and now the Obama administration finds itself having to
defend the terrible cultural baggage of the anti-religious left.

Of course many Catholic leaders originally supported Obamacare because
they naively believe against all evidence that benign angels in
government will improve medical care for the poor.  And many religious
leaders support federal welfare programs generally without understanding
that recipients of those dollars can use them for abortions,
contraceptives, or any number of activities that conflict deeply with
religious teachings. This is why private charity is so vitally important
and morally superior to a government-run medical system.

The First Amendment guarantee of religious liberty is intended to ensure
that Americans never have to put the demands of the federal government
ahead of the their own conscience or religious beliefs. This new policy
turns that guarantee on its head. The benefits or drawbacks of birth
control are not the issue.  The issue is whether government may force
private employers and private citizens to violate their moral codes
simply by operating their businesses or paying their taxes.
