---
title: Military "Cuts": Don't Believe the Hype
author: Ron Paul
date: August 20, 2012
---

Grover Norquist, the influential conservative activist, recently made
some very frank and sobering remarks about the U.S. military budget. 
Unlike many conservatives, Mr. Norquist understands that American
national security interests are not served by the interventionist
foreign policy mindset that has dominated both political parties in
recent decades.  He also understands that there is nothing
"conservative" about incurring trillions of dollars in debt to engage in
hopeless nation building exercises overseas.

Speaking at the Center for the National interest last week, Norquist
stated that "We can afford to have an adequate national defense which
keeps us free and safe and keeps everybody afraid to throw a punch at
us, as long as we don't make some of the decisions that previous
administrations have, which is to over extend ourselves overseas and
think we can run foreign governments."

He continued: "Bush decided to be the mayor of Baghdad rather than the
president of the United States. He decided to occupy Iraq and
Afghanistan rather than reform Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. That had
tremendous consequences… Richard Nixon said that America's national
defense needs are set in Moscow, meaning that we wouldn't have to spend
so much if they weren't shooting at us.  The guys who followed didn't
notice that the Soviet Union disappeared."

When a prominent DC conservative like Grover Norquist makes such bold
statements, it shows that public support for a truly conservative
foreign policy is growing.  The American people simply cannot stomach
more wars and more debt, especially with our domestic economy in
tatters. 

The American people should reject the hype about so called defense
"cuts" from both side of the political spectrum.  When the Obama
administration calls for an 18% increase in 2013 military spending,
those who propose a 20% increase portray this as a reduction! 

Even the supposedly draconian cuts called for in the "sequestration"
budget bill would keep military spending at 2006 levels when adjusted
for inflation, which is about as high in terms of GDP as during World
War II.  It’s also more than the top 13 foreign countries spend on
defense combined.  Furthermore, sequestration only cuts military
spending for one year after taking effect.  In future years Congress is
free to reinstate higher military spending levels-- so under
sequestration the most drastic case would mean spending \$5.2 trillion
instead of \$5.7 trillion over the next decade.

Is there any amount of money that would satisfy the Pentagon hawks? Even
if we were to slash our military budget in half, America easily would
remain the world’s dominant military power.  Our problems don’t result
from a lack of spending. They result from a lack of vision and a
profound misunderstanding of the single biggest threat to every American
man, woman, and child: the federal debt. 
