---
title: Fed Up with the Fed
author: Ron Paul
date: March 5, 2012

layout: page
---

While the Fed has recently released an unprecedented amount of
information on its activities, there is still much that remains
unknown.  Predictably, every push towards transparency has been fought
tooth and nail.  It took disclosure requirements enacted within the
Dodd-Frank Act to get the Fed to provide data on its emergency lending
facilities.  It took lawsuits filed by Bloomberg and Fox News to provide
data on discount window lending during the worst parts of the financial
crisis.  And it will take further concerted action on the part of
Congress, the media, and the public to keep up pressure on the Fed to
become and remain transparent. 

Transparency is not a panacea, however, as a fully transparent
organization is still capable of engaging in all sorts of mischief.
 Ironically, one of the Fed's more egregious recent actions, adopting an
explicit inflation target, was hailed by many as another wonderful
example of transparency.  Yet if you think about what this 2% inflation
target actually is, you realize that it is an explicit policy to devalue
the dollar and reduce its purchasing power.  And it adds up quickly over
time.  Two percent annual price inflation means that prices rise 22%
within a decade, and nearly 50% within two decades.

It is worse than that, however.  This explicit 2% target also fails to
take into account that whatever measure is used to determine price
inflation, be it CPI, core CPI, PCE, etc., will always be chosen with an
eye towards underreporting the true rate of inflation and price rises. 
Pressure will be exerted on those calculating the price indices, so as
not to alarm the public when prices begin to accelerate. 

Of course, government officials claim that price increases do not affect
the average American because they can always substitute hamburger for
steak, or have cereal instead of bacon to protect their family budget as
prices rise.  But the American people don't overlook the fact that their
quality of life has suffered because of the Federal Reserve and price
inflation. What will they substitute when hamburger and cereal go sky
high?

The Federal Reserve continues to keep interest rates low in the hopes of
boosting lending and consumption.  But keeping interest rates at zero
discourages saving.  Why stick money in a savings account earning 0.05%
if it is guaranteed to lose at least 2% every year?  The Federal Reserve
created the largest debt bubble the world has ever known with these
sorts of policies. The extended zero interest rate policy only
eviscerates thrift and savingsâ€”the true building blocks of prosperity. 
Capital will continue to be depleted, infrastructure will fall into
disrepair, and the United States will be a mere shadow of its former
self. 

It is well past time to end the failed monetary policy that encourages
this mistaken preference for cheap money now, rather than real wealth in
the long run.  Transparency and a full audit of the Federal Reserve is a
start and something we must continue to pursue.   And, if those in power
don't have the stomach to bring the Fed out into full daylight, the
American people deserve at least the right to conduct their economic
transactions in the medium of exchange of their choosing.
