---
title: Security and Self-Governance
author: Ron Paul
date: July 23, 2012

layout: page
---

The senseless and horrific killings last week at a movie theater in
Colorado reminded Americans that life is fragile and beautiful, and we
should not take family, friends, and loved ones for granted.  Our
prayers go out to the injured victims and the families of those killed.
As a nation we should use this terrible event to come together with the
resolve to create a society that better values life. 

We should also face the sober reality that government cannot protect us
from all possible harm.  No matter how many laws we pass, no matter how
many police or federal agents we put on the streets, no matter how
routinely we monitor internet communications, a determined individual or
group can still cause great harm.  We as individuals are responsible for
our safety and the safety of our families.

Furthermore, it is the role of civil society rather than government to
build a culture of responsible, peaceful, productive individuals. 
Government cannot mandate morality or instill hope in troubled
individuals.  External controls on our behavior imposed by government
through laws, police, and jails usually apply only after a terrible
crime has occurred. 

Internal self governance, by contrast, is a much more powerful regulator
of human behavior than any law.  This self-governance must be developed
from birth, first by parents but later also through the positive
influence of relatives and adult role models. Beyond childhood,
character development can occur through religious, civic, and social
institutions.  Ultimately, self-governance cannot be developed without
an underlying foundation of morality.

Government, however, is not a moral actor.  The state should protect our
rights, but it cannot develop our character.  Whenever terrible crimes
occur, many Americans understandably demand that government "do
something" to prevent similar crimes in the future.  But this reflexive
impulse almost always leads to bad laws and the loss of liberty. 

Do we really want to live in a world of police checkpoints, surveillance
cameras, and metal detectors?  Do we really believe government can
provide total security?  Do we want to involuntarily commit every
disaffected, disturbed, or alienated person who fantasizes about
violence?  Or can we accept that liberty is more important than the
illusion of state-provided security?

Freedom is not defined by safety.  Freedom is defined by the ability of
citizens to live without government interference.  Government cannot
create a world without risks, nor would we really wish to live in such a
fictional place.  Only a totalitarian society would even claim absolute
safety as a worthy ideal, because it would require total state control
over its citizensâ€™ lives.  Liberty has meaning only if we still believe
in it when terrible things happen and a false government security
blanket beckons.
