---
title: Failed Fed Policies Prolong the Agony
author: Ron Paul
date: January 30, 2012

layout: default
---

The Federal Reserve's interest rate price-setting board, the FOMC, met
last week.  They will continue to set the federal funds rate at well
below 1%, and plan to keep it low until the end of 2014.  That's a year
and half longer than they planned when they met just last month. 
Chairman Bernanke says they are keeping interest rates so low for so
long because the economic outlook warrants it.

The fallacies in their reasoning would be amusing if they weren't so
dangerous.  The Fed wants to keep the price of money at essentially zero
– in other words "free" – to boost the economy.  But the boost they are
attempting won't get here for another three years.  That's not a
recovery.  And we've already tried this tactic.  That's how we got into
this mess in the first place: with interest rates artificially low for a
very long time.  Free money doesn't stimulate growth, as Japan's two
lost decades clearly show.  Artificially low interest rates only serve
to punish saving, distort market signals, and cause further
malinvestment.  They also do nothing to address the only real solution
to our economic woes: liquidation of the bad debt that hangs around the
neck of the world's economy, preventing recovery.  Artificially low
interest rates merely ensure that we remain a debt-financed consumer
economy guaranteed to end up with a weaker economy and higher prices.

What baffles me even more is that two decades after the collapse of
Soviet planning and decades more since the U.S. and economists
purportedly rejected the idea of price setting, we find nothing wrong
with the Fed setting the price of money.  We all agree it is a bad idea
to have a board saying the price of wheat should be \$250 a ton today,
or carpenters wages should be \$25 an hour until the end of 2014.  But
we are perfectly comfortable with having a board set the price of one
half of every transaction in our economy.  And our markets are
supposedly free.

The Fed policies of low interest rates, Operation Twist, and rounds of
quantitative easing are all attempts to keep the economy alive
artificially. But the 12 FOMC participants cannot manage the economy any
better than the bureaucrats of the Soviet Union.  The policies haven't
worked. They won't work. Real economic recovery cannot come until we
liquidate the bad debt, until we eradicate the poor decisions we made
over the last decade, and start with a sound foundation. It is time we
acknowledge the truth of the Fed's activities: they are merely using
fancy words for price setting.

Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon was correct in the 1920s when he said
"liquidate everything."  That's what we did in the severe depression of
1920-21, and we recovered so quickly it is never even talked about.  We
didn't take his advice after the 1929 crash, and ended up with the Great
Depression.  We are committing the same mistakes, destined to live in
this Great Recession for a decade or more—it has already been four
years, the Fed says it will be at least three more!  It's time we start
rethinking what the Fed's policies are really doing to our economy,
because obviously, by their own admission, they haven't helped.
