---
title: A Fistful of Euros
author: Ron Paul
date: March 26, 2012

layout: page
---

This week, my congressional committee will hold a hearing to examine how the
Federal Reserve bails out European banks, propping up spendthrift European
governments in the process.  Unfortunately this bailout comes at the expense of
American citizens, in the form of higher prices and diminished savings down the
road.

A good analysis of the Fed’s "swap" scheme first appeared in the Wall Street
Journal back in December, in an article by Gerald O’Driscoll entitled, "*The
Federal Reserve’s Covert Bailout of Europe*."  Essentially, beginning late last
year the Fed provided U.S. dollars to the European Central Bank in exchange for
Euros-- sometimes as much as \$100 billion at a time.  The ECB then funneled
those dollars to European banks to provide liquidity and prevent crises from
bank insolvencies.  Since the currency swap was not technically a loan, the Fed
did not have to embarrass itself by openly showing foreign bank debt on its
balance sheet.  The ECB meanwhile did not have to print new Euros and expose
the true fragility of big European banks. 

The entire purpose of this unholy arrangement was to obscure the truth: namely
that the Fed was bailing out Europe with U.S. dollars. 

But why is it the business of the Federal Reserve to bail out European banks
that find themselves short of dollars to pay their dollar-denominated
contracts? After all, those contracts often were hedges taken to protect banks
against weakness of the Euro.  Hedges are supposed to reduce risk, but banks
that miscalculate should suffer their own losses accordingly.  It’s not our
business if the ECB chooses to create moral hazards by providing liquidity to
European banks, but why should the Fed prop up Europe’s bad decisions! 

The Fed has promised to provide unlimited amounts of dollars to the ECB, should
circumstances require it.  It boggles the mind.  Of course when Fed officials
first entered into these swap agreements with the ECB last September, they did
so quietly.  The American public only found out via websites of the ECB, the
Bank of England, or the Swiss Central Bank.

The Fed already has pumped trillions of dollars into the economy since 2008,
and US banks currently hold \$1.5 trillion of excess reserves.  So why don't
American banks lend those excess trillions to European banks if they really
need dollars?  If US banks could earn 1 or 2 percent on those loans, they might
just be interested. But they can't compete with the 1/2 percent interest rate
charged by the Fed to the ECB.  That's one glaring example of the harm caused
by the Fed's ability to create money and loan it at below-market interest rates.

The Fed argues that these loans will be temporary, merely providing a little
boost to get Europe over the hump.  But that's what they thought a few years
ago when such lines of credit to the ECB were set to expire, only to see the
Fed reauthorize them. What happens if the European financial system collapses? 
Will the Fed be left holding a bunch of worthless Euros?  Will the ECB simply
shrug and turn over the collateral it received from European banks, maybe in
the form of bonds from Ireland, Italy, or Greece?  Have the 17 individual
central banks backing the ECB pledged their gold holdings as collateral?

The Fed has placed a hundred-billion dollar bet on the future of the Euro, with
the strength of the dollar on the line.  This is absolutely irresponsible, and
directly contrary to market discipline.  Let private banks, European or
otherwise, take their own risks.  Let foreign central banks inflate their own
currencies and suffer the consequences.  In other words, it’s time to apply
market principles to banks and money.
