---
title: Demolishing Due Process
author: Ron Paul
date: March 19, 2012
---

It is ironic but perhaps sadly appropriate that Attorney General Eric
Holder would choose a law school, Northwestern University, to deliver a
speech earlier this month in which he demolished what was left of the
rule of law in America.

In what history likely will record as a turning point, Attorney General
Holder bluntly explained that this administration believes it has the
authority to use lethal force against Americans if the President
determines them to be a threat to the nation. He tells us that this is
not a violation of the due process requirements of our Constitution
because the President himself embodies "due process" as he unilaterally
determines who is to be targeted. As Holder said, "a careful and
thorough executive branch review of the facts in a case amounts to 'due
process.'" That means that the administration believes it is the
President himself who is to be the judge, jury, and executioner.

As George Washington University Law Professor Jonathan Turley wrote of
the Holder speech:

> All the Administration has said is that they closely and faithfully follow their own guidelines â€” even if their decisions are not subject to judicial review. The fact that they say those guidelines are based on notions of due process is meaningless. They are not a constitutional process of review.

It is particularly bizarre to hear the logic of the administration
claiming the right to target its citizens according to some secret
selection process, when we justified our attacks against Iraq and Libya
because their leaders supposedly were targeting their own citizens! We
also now plan a covert war against Syria for the same reason.

I should make it perfectly clear that I believe any individual who is
engaging in violence against this country or its citizens should be
brought to justice. But as Attorney General Holder himself points out in
the same speech, our civilian courts have a very good track record of
trying and convicting individuals involved with terrorism against the
United States. Our civilian court system, with the guarantee of real due
process, judicial review, and a fair trial, is our strength, not a
weakness. It is not an impediment to be sidestepped in the push for
convictions or assassinations, but rather a process that guarantees that
fundamental right to be considered innocent until proven guilty in a
court of law.

I am encouraged, however that there appears to be the beginning of a
backlash against the administration's authoritarian claims.  Just
recently I did an interview with conservative radio talk show host Laura
Ingraham who expressed grave concern over using these sorts of tactics
against Americans using the supposed war on terror as justification.
Sadly, many conservative leaders were silent when Republican President
George W. Bush laid the groundwork for this administration's lawlessness
with the PATRIOT Act, warrantless wiretapping, indefinite detention
without trial, and other violations. Similarly, as Professor Turley
points out, "Democrats previously demanded the 'torture memos' of the
Bush administration that revealed poor legal analysis by Judge Jay Bybee
and Professor John Yoo to justify torture. Now, however, Democrats are
largely silent in the face of a president claiming the right to
unilaterally kill citizens."  The misuse of and disregard for our
Constitution for partisan political gain is likely one reason the
American public holds Congress in such low esteem. Now the stakes are
much higher.  Congress and the people should finally wake up!
