---
title: The CBO Sees the Economic Cliff Ahead
author: Ron Paul
date: June 11, 2012
---


Last week the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) issued its annual
long-term budget outlook report, and the 2012 numbers are not promising.
In fact, the CBO estimates that federal debt will rise to 70% of GDP by
the end of the year-- the highest percentage since World War II. The
report also paints a stark picture of entitlement spending, as retiring
Baby Boomers will cause government spending on health care, Social
Security, and Medicare to explode as a percentage of GDP in coming
years.

While the mainstream media correctly characterized the CBO report as
highly pessimistic, they also ignored longstanding errors of methodology
in CBO estimates. And those errors tend to support arguments for higher
taxes and government spending, when in fact America needs exactly the
opposite.

As Paul Roderick Gregory explained in a [recent Forbes
column](http://tinyurl.com/cf746dl), CBO has always applied wrongheaded
assumptions inherent in Keynesian economics when forecasting future
deficits - no matter how many times both history and economic theory
have proven such assumptions incorrect. In particular, CBO seems wedded
to two enduring Keynesian myths: First, that higher taxes necessarily
increase federal revenue and have no negative effect on the economy;
and second, that lower government spending hurts the economy.  Neither
is true, of course.

CBO also fails to factor in unexpected wars and expensive foreign
entanglements, and we should not assign too much validity to predictive
models based on peace. Judging from the actions and rhetoric coming from
both parties in Washington, new military entanglements in Syria and Iran
may well spike military spending in coming years.

Despite these sobering budget realities, the CBO report suggests that a
solution is possible with merely a few minor adjustments in the way
Congress handles economic issues. But what we need are not minor
adjustments, but rather a fundamental shift in our philosophy of
government.  If we could come to our senses about the proper role of
government in America, and what level of government interference is
appropriate in a free economy, we would quickly find that there is no
reason for government to spend so much, borrow so much, and tax so much.

If we simply allowed markets to work free of governmental or Federal
Reserve interference, bad debt would be liquidated relatively quickly
and malinvestment would be curtailed. Scaled-back regulations would
encourage businesses to expand. Lower taxes would jump start investment
and spur job creation.

This is not rocket science, it is Economics 101. All it would take is
for government to get out of the way. There would be some short term
pain, of course, but only by allowing the bubble to burst and bad debt
to liquidate can we ever hope to begin building a real economy again.

The CBO report was alarming to most simply because they know neither
party will take the steps necessary to avoid eventual fiscal calamity.
Instead, despite their rhetoric, both parties want to maintain the
fantasy that "deficits donâ€™t matter." But the CBO report, combined with
what is happening in Greece and the European Union, should finally make
the undeniable case that economic realities apply even to industrialized
first world economies. We must take concrete steps today to avoid having
America become the next Greece.
