---
title: The Supreme Court and Obamacare
author: Ron Paul
date: April 2, 2012

layout: default
---

Last week the Supreme Court heard arguments concerning the constitutionality of
the Obamacare law, focusing on the mandate requiring every American to buy
health insurance or pay fines enforced by the IRS.  Hopefully the Court will
strike down this abomination, but we must recognize that the federal judiciary
has an abysmal record when it comes to protecting liberty.  It’s doubtful the
entire law will be struck down.  Regardless, the political left will continue
its drive toward a single-payer, government run health care system.

The insurance mandate clearly exceeds the federal government’s powers under the
interstate commerce clause found in Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution. 
This is patently obvious: the power to "regulate" commerce cannot include the
power to compel commerce!  Those who claim otherwise simply ignore the plain
meaning of the Constitution because they don’t want to limit federal power in
any way.

The commerce clause was intended simply to give Congress the power to regulate
foreign trade, and also to prevent states from imposing tariffs on interstate
goods.  In *Federalist Paper No. 22*, Alexander Hamilton makes it clear the
simple intent behind the clause was to prevent states from placing tolls or
tariffs on goods as they passed through each state-- a practice that had proven
particularly destructive across the many principalities of the German empire.

But the Supreme Court has utterly abused the commerce clause for decades, at
least since the infamous 1942 case of *Wickard v. Filburn*.  In that instance
the Court decided that a farmer growing wheat for purely personal use still
affected interstate commerce--presumably by not participating in it!  As
economist Thomas Sowell explains in a recent article, the *Wickard* case marked
the final death of federalism: if the federal government can regulate "anything
with any potential effect on interstate commerce, the 10^th^ Amendment’s
limitations on the power of the federal government virtually disappeared."

It is precisely this lawless usurpation of federalism that liberty-minded
Americans must oppose. Why should a single swing vote on the Supreme Court
decide if our entire nation is saddled with Obamacare? The doctrine of judicial
review, which is nowhere to be found in Article III of the Constitution, has
done nothing to defend liberty against extra-constitutional excesses by
government.  It is federalism and states’ rights that should protect our
liberty, not nine individuals on a godlike Supreme Court.

While I’m heartened that many conservatives understand this mandate exceeds the
strictly enumerated powers of Congress, there are many federal mandates
conservatives casually accept.  The Medicare part D bill-- passed under a
Republican President and a Republican House--mandates that you submit payroll
taxes to provide prescription drugs to seniors.  The Sarbanes-Oxley bill, also
passed by Republicans, mandates that companies expend countless hours of costly
manpower producing useless reports.  Selective service laws, supported by
defense hawks, mandate that young people sign up for potential conscription.  I
understand the distinction between these mandates and Obamacare, but the bigger
point is that Congress routinely imposes mandates that are wildly beyond the
scope of Article I, Section 8.

Perhaps the most important lesson from Obamacare is that while liberty is lost
incrementally, it cannot be regained incrementally.  The federal leviathan
continues its steady growth; sometimes boldly and sometimes quietly. Obamacare
is just the latest example, but make no mistake: the statists are winning.  So
advocates of liberty must reject incremental approaches and fight boldly for
bedrock principles.  We must forcefully oppose lawless government, and demand a
return to federalism by electing a Congress that legislates only within its
strictly limited authority under Article I, Section 8.
