---
title: Unconstitutional Uses of Drones Must Stop
author: Ron Paul
date: June 18, 2012

layout: page
---

Last week I joined several of my colleagues in sending a letter to
President Obama requesting clarification of his criteria for the lethal
use of drones overseas. Administration officials assure us that a "high
degree of confidence" is required that the person targeted by a drone is
a terrorist.  However, press reports have suggested that mere "patterns
of behavior" and other vague criteria are actually being used to decide
who to target in a drone strike. I am concerned that an already
troublingly low threshold for execution on foreign soil may be even
lower than we imagined.

The use of drones overseas may have become so convenient, operated as
they are from a great distance, that far more "collateral damage" has
become acceptable. Collateral damage is a polite way of saying killing
innocent civilians. Is the ease of drone use a slippery slope to
disregard for justice, and if so what might that mean for us as they
become more widely used on American soil against American citizens?

This dramatic increase in the use of drones and the lowered threshold
for their use to kill foreigners has tremendous implications for our
national security. At home, some claim the use of drones reduces risk to
American service members. But this can be true only in the most
shortsighted sense. Internationally the expanded use of drones is wildly
unpopular and in fact creates more enemies than it eliminates.

Earlier this month a former top terrorism official at the CIA warned
that President Barack Obama's expanded use of drones may actually be
creating terrorist "safe havens." Robert Grenier, who headed the CIA's
counter-terrorism center from 2004 to 2006, told a British newspaper
that, "[the drone program] needs to be targeted much more finely. We
have been seduced by them and the unintended consequences of our actions
are going to outweigh the intended consequences."

After a drone strike in Yemen last month once again killed more
civilians than suspected al-Qaeda members, a Yemeni lawyer sent a
message to President Obama stating "Dear Obama, when a U.S. drone
missile kills a child in Yemen, the father will go to war with you,
guaranteed. Nothing to do with Al Qaeda." These are the unseen victims
of the president's expanded use of drones, but we should pay attention
and we should ask ourselves how we would feel if the tables were turned
and a foreign power was killing innocent American children from
thousands of miles away. Would we not feel the same?

The expanded use of drones overseas has been matched with the expanded
use of drones in the United States, which should alarm every American
who values the Constitution and its protections against government
interference in our private lives. Recently, the governor of Virginia
welcomed the expanded use of drones in his state because they "make law
enforcement more productive." I find that attitude chilling and am sure
I am not alone.

Do we want to live in a country where our government constantly flies
aircraft overhead to make sure we are not doing anything it disapproves
of? Already the Environmental Protection Agency uses drone surveillance
to spy on farmers and ranchers to see if they are in compliance with
regulations. Local law enforcement agencies are eyeing drone use with
great anticipation.  Do we really want to live under the watchful eye of
"Big Brother"? It is terrifying enough to see how drones are being
misused abroad. We must curtail the government's ability use drones
right away lest the massacres in Yemen and Pakistan turn out to be crude
training exercises for what the administration has in mind on our own
soil.
