---
title: The Costs of War
author: Ron Paul
date: April 30, 2012

layout: page
---

This month Veterans Affairs Secretary Eric K. Shinseki announced the
addition of some 1,900 mental health nurses, psychiatrists,
psychologists, and social workers to its existing workforce of 20,590
mental health staff in attempt to get a handle on the epidemic of
suicides among combat veterans. Unfortunately, when presidents misuse
our military on an unprecedented scale – and Congress lets them get away
with it – the resulting stress causes military suicides to increase
dramatically, both among active duty and retired service members.  In
fact, military deaths from suicide far outnumber combat deaths.
According to an article in the Air Force Times this month, suicides
among airmen are up 40 percent over last year.

Considering the multiple deployments service members are forced to
endure as the war in Afghanistan stretches into its second decade, these
figures are sadly unsurprising.

Ironically, the same VA Secretary Eric Shinseki was forced to retire
from the Army by President Bush for daring to suggest that an invasion
and occupation of Iraq would not be the cakewalk that neoconservatives
promised. Then Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz, who is not a
military veteran, claimed that General Shinseki was "wildly off the
mark" for suggesting that several hundred thousand soldiers would be
required to secure post-invasion Iraq. Now we see who was right on the
costs of war.

In addition to the hidden human costs of our seemingly endless wars are
the economic costs. In 2008, Nobel Prize winning economist Joseph
Stiglitz wrote "The Three Trillion Dollar War: The True Cost of the Iraq
Conflict." Stiglitz illustrates that taking into account the total costs
of the war, including replacing military equipment and caring for
thousands of wounded veterans for the rest of their lives, the Iraq war
will cost us orders of magnitude greater than the 50 billion dollars
promised by the White House before the invasion. Add all the costs of
Afghanistan into the mix, wrote Stiglitz, and the bill tops \$7
trillion.

Is it any wonder why our infrastructure at home crumbles, healthcare is
more expensive and harder to come by, and unemployment together with
inflation continue their steady rise? Imagine the productive power of
that seven trillion dollars in our private sector. What could it have
done were it in private hands; what may have been discovered, what
diseases might have been cured, what might have been built, how many
productive jobs created?

With the bills coming due for our decade of reckless military action,
the cuts rarely come from the well-connected military industrial complex
with their lobbyists and powerful political allies. In President Obama's
2013 budget, troop strength is to be cut significantly while enormously
expensive and largely superfluous weapons systems emerge essentially
unscathed. As defense analyst Winslow Wheeler wrote this month, costs of
the "next generation" fighter, the F-35, will increase by another \$289
million. This despite the fact that the fighter is badly designed and
already outdated, a "virtual flying piano" writes Wheeler.

The military contractors building monstrosities like the F-35 are
politically connected and thus protected. Unfortunately, returning
military veterans are less so. In the same 2013 budget, the White House
proposes to increase medical and pharmaceutical costs paid by veterans
while reducing their cost of living increases. And how many years of
increasingly alarming mental illness and suicide statistics has it taken
for the modest increase in resources to be made available?

Those who predicted the real costs of our decade of global military
conquest were ridiculed, scoffed at, and fired. History has now shown us
that much of what they warned was correct. America is clearly less
secure after a decade of unnecessary wars. It is more vulnerable and
closer to economic collapse. Its military is nearly broken from years of
abuse. Will we come back to our senses?
