---
title: Meaningless Words in Politics
author: Ron Paul
date: August 27, 2012

layout: page
---

As we enter the fall political season, we will hear a great deal of
rhetoric from both major political parties and their many candidates for
office.  It’s important for us to remember, however, that words can be
made meaningless by misuse or overuse.  And when we as citizens allow
politicians to obscure the truth by distorting words, we diminish
ourselves and our nation.

For example, we’ve all heard politicians use the words "democracy" and
"freedom" countless times. They are used interchangeably in modern
political discourse, yet their true meanings are very different.  They
have become what George Orwell termed "[meaningless
words](http://j.mp/U4bFdF)". 
Words like "freedom," "democracy," and "justice," Orwell explained, have
been abused for so long that their original meanings have been
eviscerated.  In Orwell’s view, such words were "often used in a
consciously dishonest way." 

Without precise meanings behind words, politicians and elites can
obscure reality and condition people to reflexively associate certain
words with positive or negative perceptions.  In other words, unpleasant
facts can be hidden behind purposely meaningless language.  As just one
example, Americans have been conditioned to accept the word "democracy"
as a synonym for freedom.   Thus we are conditioned to believe that
democracy is always and everywhere benevolent.

The problem is that democracy is not freedom.  Democracy is simply
majoritarianism, which is inherently incompatible with freedom.  While
our Constitution certainly features certain democratic mechanisms, it
also features inherently undemocratic mechanisms like the First
Amendment and the Electoral College.  American is a constitutional
republic, not a democracy.  Yet we’ve been bombarded with the
meaningless word "democracy" for so long that few Americans understand
the difference. 

If we intend to use the word freedom in an honest way, we should have
the simple integrity to give it real meaning: Freedom is living without
government coercion.  So when a politician talks about freedom or
liberty--regardless of the issue being discussed-- ask yourself whether
he is advocating more government force or less.

The words "liberal" and "conservative" have also been abused. 
"Liberalism," which once stood for civil, political, and economic
liberties, has become a synonym for omnipotent coercive government. 
Liberalism has been redefined to mean liberation from material wants,
always via a large and benevolent government that exists to create
equality on earth. 

"Conservatism," meanwhile, once meant respect for tradition and distrust
of active government.  But in recent decades conservatism has been
redefined as support for big-government grandiosity via military
adventurism, corporatism, and inflationary monetary policy.  The modern
political right has redefined conservatism into support for an
all-powerful central state, provided that the state furthers supposedly
conservative goals.

Orwell certainly was right about the use of meaningless words in
politics.  Our task, therefore, is to reclaim our language and reclaim
our liberties.  If we hope to remain free, we must cut through the fog
and attach concrete meanings to the words politicians use to deceive
us. 
