---
title: Secession: Are We Free To Go?
author: Ron Paul
date: November 19, 2012
---

Is all the recent talk of secession mere sour grapes over the election,
or perhaps something deeper?   Currently there are active petitions in
support of secession for [all 50
states](http://j.mp/YcYqwE),
with Texas taking the lead in number of signatures.  Texas has well over
the number of signatures needed to generate a response from the
administration, and while I wouldn't hold my breath on Texas actually
seceding, I believe these petitions raise a lot of worthwhile questions
about the nature of our union. 

Is it treasonous to want to secede from the United States?  Many think
the question of secession was settled by our Civil War.  On the
contrary; the principles of self-governance and voluntary association
are at the core of our founding.  Clearly Thomas Jefferson believed
secession was proper, albeit as a last resort. Writing to [William Giles
in 1825](http://j.mp/U5PSPy), he concluded that
states:

> "should separate from our companions only when the sole alternatives left, are the dissolution of our Union with them, or submission to a government without limitation of powers."

Keep in mind that the first and third paragraphs of the Declaration of
Independence expressly contemplate the dissolution of a political union
when the underlying government becomes tyrannical.* *

Do we have a "government without limitation of powers" yet?  The Federal
government kept the Union together through violence and force in the
Civil War, but did might really make right? 

Secession is a deeply American principle.  This country was born through
secession.  Some felt it was treasonous to secede from England, but
those "traitors" became our country's greatest patriots.

There is nothing treasonous or unpatriotic about wanting a federal
government that is more responsive to the people it represents.  That is
what our Revolutionary War was all about and today our own federal
government is vastly overstepping its constitutional bounds with no
signs of reform.  In fact, the recent election only further entrenched
the status quo.  If the possibility of secession is completely off the
table there is nothing to stop the federal government from continuing to
encroach on our liberties and no recourse for those who are sick and
tired of it.

Consider the ballot measures that passed in Colorado and Washington
state regarding marijuana laws.  The people in those states have clearly
indicated that they are ready to try something different where drug
policy is concerned, yet they will still face a tremendous threat from
the federal government.  In California, the Feds have been arresting
peaceful medical marijuana users and [raiding
dispensaries](http://j.mp/VidpDN)
that state and local governments have sanctioned. This shouldn't happen
in a free country. 

It remains to be seen what will happen in states that are refusing to
comply with the deeply unpopular mandates of Obamacare by [not setting
up healthcare
exchanges](http://j.mp/X6Sofs). 
It appears the Federal government will not respect those decisions
either.

In a free country, governments derive their power from the consent of
the governed. When the people have very clearly withdrawn their consent
for a law, the discussion should be over.  If the Feds refuse to accept
that and continue to run roughshod over the people, at what point do we
acknowledge that that is not freedom anymore?  At what point should the
people dissolve the political bands which have connected them with an
increasingly tyrannical and oppressive federal government?  And if
people or states are not free to leave the United States as a last
resort, can they really think of themselves as free? 

If a people cannot secede from an oppressive government, they cannot
truly be considered free.
