---
title: Inflation is a Monetary Phenomenon
author: Ron Paul
date: July 16, 2012

layout: default
---

Later this month Congress will have an unprecedented opportunity to
force the Federal Reserve to provide meaningful transparency to
lawmakers and taxpayers. HR 459, my bill known as "Audit the Fed," is
scheduled for a vote before the full Congress in July. More than 270 of
my colleagues cosponsored the bill, and it has the support of
congressional leadership. But its passage in the House of
Representatives is only the beginning of the battle, as many Senators
and the President still don’t see the critical need to have a national
discussion about monetary policy.

The American public now senses that the Fed’s actions, especially since
2008, are enormously inflationary and will cause great harm to the
American economy in the long run. They are beginning to understand what
so many economists still don’t understand, which is that inflation is a
monetary phenomenon, and rising prices are merely a symptom of that
phenomenon.  Prices eventually rise when the supply of US dollars (paper
or electronic) grows faster than the available goods and services being
chased by those dollars.

This fundamental truth has been thoroughly explained by Milton Friedman
and many others, so today’s Keynesian economists have no excuse for
their claims that "inflation is under control."  Ordinary Americans
don’t need a PhD simply to look at the Fed’s balance sheet and
understand the staggering amount of money creation that has occurred in
recent years. They know it will have harmful consequences for all of us
eventually.

I've spoken at length about inflation, and how Fed money creation is
effectively a tax. Every dollar created out of thin air dilutes the
value of the dollars in your pocket and your savings in the bank. But
the truth is that we are only beginning to see the results of the Fed’s
dramatic increase in the money supply. As former Fed Chair Alan
Greenspan himself explained last week to Larry Kudlow, most of the
dollar deposits created by the Fed via successive rounds of
"quantitative easing" remain on the balance sheet of Fed member banks.
Because of very rational economic fears, banks are not lending,
businesses are not expanding, and individuals are shedding debt. So, the
trillions of dollars created by the Fed since 2008 remained largely
undeployed. When those dollars eventually make their way into the world
economy, prices across all sectors of the economy are likely to rise
dramatically.

The true evil of inflation is that newly created money benefits
politically favored financial interests, especially banks, on the front
end. Over time, however, the net result of monetary inflation is always
the devaluation of savings and purchasing power. This devaluation
discourages saving, which is the key to capital accumulation and
investment in a healthy economy. Inflation also tends to hurt seniors
and those living on fixed incomes the most.

For decades the Fed has operated without any meaningful oversight
whatsoever, resulting in the loss of savings, loss of purchasing power,
and loss of quality of life for all Americans. It causes individuals and
businesses to make bad decisions, misallocating their capital because
market signals have been distorted. It causes financial ruin by
engineering the inevitable boom and bust cycles that so many erroneously
blame on capitalism. And it does all this in secrecy, to the benefit of
the financial and political classes. It is time to Audit the Fed, as a
first step toward ending its unchecked power over our money and economic
fortunes.
