---
title: Fiscal Cliff Vote Shows How Washington Really Works
author: Ron Paul
date: January 7, 2013

layout: page
---

Last week the Senate and House demonstrated again why their approval ratings
are so low. The 154 page "fiscal cliff" bill was made available to Senators
just three minutes before the vote was taken on the legislation. No one can
read 154 pages in three minutes, so it is safe to assume that the legislation
was passed without being read.

Then the House brought the lengthy and complicated bill to a vote just 22 hours
after the text had been available, meaning a full reading of the legislation
was not likely possible. This was a clear violation of the "three day rule"
adopted by the 112th Congress, which in the name of transparency ordered the
House to make legislation available to the public a full three days before a
Floor vote.

Perhaps this race to a vote, amid cries of the end of the world without a
solution to the manufactured crisis, explains why an even greater than usual
amount of special-interest carve-outs made it into the bill.

Article 1, Section 7 of the US Constitution clearly states that "All bills for
raising Revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives," but as has
been done many times, the Senate simply attached its bill to an existing House
bill and claimed that this Constitutional requirement had been satisfied.

If the process was dishonest and unconstitutional, the content of the bill was
even worse.

The "rescue" legislation was packed full of special tax deals for
well-connected corporations with the money to hire high-profile lobbyists â€“
usually those who have spent a good deal of time as legislators themselves.

The principle of tax cuts and breaks themselves are not the problem, however.
It is incorrect to view any return of tax money to its rightful owner as money
taken from the government. Wealth belongs to those who generate it not to
government. However, while well-connected special interests like Hollywood and
rum manufacturers were being granted targeted tax assistance, the vast majority
of Americans were being hit with a significant tax increase in the form of
higher payroll taxes. Rather than cut a dime from federal spending, this bill
granted breaks to the corporate elites and paid for the "lost revenue" by
passing the costs on to the rest of us.

The "fiscal cliff" bill also rescued other corporate interests. Included in the
text was a nine-month extension of the 2008 Farm Bill. This is corporate
welfare at its worst, spending billions to enrich big corporate farms with
direct subsidies at the expense of small farmers -- and the taxpayer.

Last week's last minute deal was the worst of both worlds: higher taxes on
nearly all Americans now and a promise to begin thinking about modest cuts in
spending growth two months down the road. While there was much hand-wringing
over the "draconian" cuts that would have been imposed by sequestration, in
fact sequestration would not have cut spending at all. Under the sequestration
plan, government spending would increase by $1.6 trillion over the next eight
years. Congress calls this a cut because without sequestration spending would
increase by $1.7 trillion over the same time frame. Either way it is an
increase in spending, however.

I have little hope that a majority of Congress and the President will change
their ways and support real spending reductions. Fortunately, increasing
numbers of Americans are awakening to the dangers posed by the growth of the
welfare-warfare state. Hopefully this movement will continue to grow and force
the politicians to reverse course before government spending, taxing, and
inflation destroys our economy entirely.
