---
title: The Illusion of Safety
author: Ron Paul
date: August 22, 2011

layout: default
---

Recent incidents of violence in Norway and London have made us
understandably uncomfortable here at home, as many fear that a
worsening economy will lead to violence and unrest in American cities.
This is why Congress must view the economy as its first priority and a
matter of national security: unless and until we get our fiscal house
in order to foster economic growth, civil society will continue to
deteriorate.

The fundamental lesson every American should learn from these incidents
is that government cannot protect us. No matter how many laws we pass,
no matter how many police or federal agents we put on the streets, a
determined individual or group can still cause great harm. Both Norway
and England have strict gun control laws, and London in particular has
security cameras monitoring nearly all public areas. But laws and spy
cameras are useless in the face of lawless mobs or sick mass killers.
Only private individuals on the scene could have prevented or lessened
these tragedies. And we should remember that theft, arson, and property
damage were not the only criminal acts in London--innocent bystanders
were assaulted and killed as well. In those instances deadly force used
in self-defense would have been fully justified.

Perhaps the only good that can come from these terrible events is a
reinforced understanding that we as individuals are responsible for our
safety and the safety of our families. This means, frankly, that we
must safely own and use firearms to deter or prevent criminal assaults
on our homes and persons. It is absurd to think police or government
agents can protect 310 million Americans around the clock.

Thanks to our media and many government officials, however, Americans
have become conditioned to view the state as our protector and the
solution to every problem. Whenever something terrible happens,
especially when it becomes a prominent news story, people reflexively
demand that government do something. This impulse almost always leads
to bad laws, more debt, and the loss of liberty. It is completely at
odds with the best American traditions of self-reliance and individual
responsibility.

Do we really want to live in a world of police checkpoints,
surveillance cameras, and metal detectors? Do we want to imprison every
disturbed or alienated individual who fantasizes about violence? Do we
really believe government can provide total security? Or can we accept
that liberty is more important than the illusion of state-provided
security?

Freedom is not defined by safety. Freedom is defined by the ability of
citizens to live without government interference unless they use force
or fraud against others. Government cannot create a world without
risks, nor would we really wish to live in such a fictional place. Only
a totalitarian society would even claim absolute safety as a worthy
ideal, because it would require total state control over its citizensâ€™
lives. Liberty has meaning only if we still believe in it when terrible
things happen and a false government security blanket beckons.
