---
title: On Real Respect for the Constitution
author: Ron Paul
date: January 24, 2011

layout: default
---

I am pleased that the Constitution has received a lot of attention in
recent weeks, thanks to the tea party movement. The 112^th^ Congress
kicked off with a reading of the Constitution on the floor of the
House. It goes without saying that Members of Congress should have read
the Constitution many times, and should continue to study it.

Citing the particular clause of the Constitution that authorizes newly
introduced legislation is a reasonable suggestion, yet in reality it
will do little to restrain unconstitutional growth of the federal
government. We have had such rules in the past and no benefit came of
it.

The laws that are passed reflect the preferences and personal agendas
of those in charge. For too long those agendas have expanded government
at the expense of personal liberty, regardless of which political party
was in charge. This expansion of government clearly violated the
Constitution, yet it was always argued that this or that program
somehow conformed to that "living" document.

By misinterpreting the general welfare clause, the interstate commerce
clause, and the "necessary and proper" clause, Congress has justified
every conceivable expansion of the federal government. Congress also
has misinterpreted the 14th Amendment and legislated as though it had
repealed the 10th Amendment. Sadly, Congress has also systematically
abdicated its prerogatives and responsibilities to the executive branch
over many decades.

Too many people, in and out of Congress, grew up being taught that the
Constitution was a "modern living document." Though the authors allowed
for flexibility through the amendment process, this process has been
ignored for the sake of speed and convenience. As a result, the
Constitution now has little actual meaning.

Our Constitution should be viewed as law, and Members of Congress
should be expected to follow, respect, understand, and uphold the law.
But a document is just a piece of paper if those who represent us and
promise to obey it ignore it instead. Celebrating the Constitution
without this understanding will do nothing to restore the greatness of
America.

Simply praising the document distracts from the need for Members to
resist special interests, political self-interests, emergency needs in
times of crisis, fear-based economic myths, and the persistent
temptation to seek security over liberty while ignoring personal
responsibility and self-reliance.

I wonder: will this welcomed renewed interest in the Constitution lead
to a healthy reassessment of all of our policies?

* Will there be no more wars without an actual congressional
declaration?

* Will the Federal Reserve Act be repealed?

* Will only gold and silver be deemed legal tender?

* Will we end all unconstitutional federal departments, including the
Department of Energy, Education, Agriculture, Commerce, Health and
Human Services, Homeland Security, and Labor?

* Will the Patriot Act be repealed and all warrantless searches stopped?

* Will the TSA be abolished?

* Will the IRS's unconstitutional collection powers end?

* Will executive and judicial quasi-legislative powers end?

* Will we end the federal war on drugs?

* Will we end the federal government's involvement in medical care?

* Will we end all of the federal government's illusionary insurance
programs?

* Will we ban secret prisons, trials without due process, and
assassinations?

* Will we end our foreign policy of invasion and occupation?

For America to once again become the standard for a free society, our
love of liberty and desire for peace must far surpass any public
display of fidelity to the Constitution. We must first look to strong
moral character, respect for the rule of law, and an understanding of
the proper role of government in a free society.
