---
title: Congress Must Reject the Welfare/Warfare State
author: Ron Paul
date: February 28, 2011

layout: default
---

During the past few weeks, Congress has been locked in a battle to pass
a continuing resolution to fund government operations through
September. Both supporters and opponents of the bill, HR 1, claim it is
a serious attempt to reduce federal spending. However, an examination
of the details of the bill call that claim into question. For one
thing, the oft-cited assertion that HR 1 reduces spending by \$99
billion is misleading. The \$99 billion figure merely represents the
amount that HR 1 reduces spending from the President’s proposed Fiscal
Year 2011 budget - not reductions in actual spending. Trying to claim
credit for a reduction in spending based on cuts in proposed spending
is like claiming someone is following a diet because he had only five
slices of pizza when he intended to have 10 slices!

In fact, HR 1 only reduces real federal spending by \$66 billion
compared to last year’s budget. This may seem like a lot to the average
American but in the context of an overwhelming trillion-dollar budget
and a national debt that could exceed 100 percent of GNP in September,
it is barely a drop in the bucket.

One reason that HR 1 does not cut spending enough is that too many
fiscal conservatives continue to embrace the fallacy that we can
balance the budget without reducing spending on militarism. Until
Congress realizes the folly of spending trillions pretending to impose
democracy on the world we will never be able to seriously reduce
spending.

Congress must not only reject the warfare state, it must also reject
the welfare state. HR 1 is more aggressive in ending domestic spending
than foreign spending, and does zero out some objectionable federal
programs such as AmeriCorps. However, HR 1 leaves most of the current
functions of the federal government undisturbed. This bill thus
continues the delusion that we can have a fiscally responsible and
efficient welfare state.

The failure to even attempt to address the serious threat the
welfare-warfare state poses to American liberty and prosperity is the
main reason why supporters of limited government and individual liberty
ultimately should find HR 1 unsatisfactory. Only a rejection of the
view that Congress can run the economy, run our lives, and run the
world will allow us to make the spending reductions necessary to avert
a serious financial crisis. This does not mean we should not prioritize
and discuss how to gradually transition away from the welfare state in
a manner that does not harm those currently relying on these programs.
However, we must go beyond balancing the budget to transitioning back
to a free society, and that means eventually placing responsibility for
social welfare back in the hands of individuals and private
institutions.

Despite the overheated rhetoric heard during the debate, HR 1 is a
diversion from the difficult task of restoring constitutional
government and a free economy and society. It is time for Congress to
get serious about cutting spending, not merely tinkering around the
edges of the proposed budget and kicking the can down the road for
future generations. If we fail to act decisively now, there will soon
come a time when both our money and our capacity to borrow will run
out. When that happens, our ability to negotiate and play political
games with spending priorities will be over. To avoid real chaos, the
time to start dealing with our bloated government budget is right now.
