---
title: A Palestinian State?
author: Ron Paul
date: September 26, 2011

layout: default
---

The Palestinian Authority's recent announcement that it would seek UN
recognition as an independent state dominated the news and the
political debate in the United States last week, though in truth it
should mean very little to us. Only a political class harboring the
illusion it can run the world obsesses over the aspirations of a tiny
population on a tiny piece of land thousands of miles away. Remember,
the UN initiated this persistent conflict with its 1947 Partition Plan.

Unfortunately the debate is dominated by those who either support the
Israeli side in the conflict, or those who support the Palestinian
desire for statehood. We rarely seem to hear the view of those who
support the US side and US interests. I am on that side. I believe that
we can no longer police the world. We can no longer bribe the Israelis
and Palestinians to continue an endless "peace process" that goes
nowhere. It is not in our interest to hector the Palestinians or the
Israelis, or to "export" democracy to the region but reject it when
people vote the "wrong" way.

I have reservations about the Palestinian drive for UN recognition.
Personally I wish the United States would de-recognize the United
Nations. As most readers already know, in every Congress I introduce
legislation to end our membership in that organization. The UN is a
threat to our sovereignty-- and as we are the main source of its
income, it is a threat to our economic well-being. Increasingly over
the past several years, we see the United Nations providing political
and legal cover for the military aspirations of interventionists rather
than serving as an international forum to preserve peace.
Neoconservatives in the US have grown to love the United Nations as
they co-opt the organization under the guise of endless "reform." Under
the sovereignty-destroying doctrine of "Responsibility to Protect,"
adopted at the 2005 World Summit, the UN takes it upon itself to
intervene in internal conflicts of its member states whenever it
believes that human rights are being violated. Thus under
"Responsibility to Protect," the UN provides the green light for a kind
of global no-knock raid on any sovereign country.

If asked, I would personally counsel the Palestinians to avoid the
United Nations. UN membership and participation is no guarantee that
sovereignty will be respected. We see what happens to UN members such
as Iraq and Libya when those countries' leaders fall out of favor with
US administrations: under US and allied pressure a fig leaf resolution
is adopted in the UN to facilitate devastating military intervention.
When the UN gave NATO the green light to bomb Libya there was no
genocide taking place. It was a purely preventative war. The result?
Thousands dead, a destroyed country, and extremely dubious new leaders.

While I do not see UN membership as a particularly productive move for
the Palestinian leadership, I do not believe the US should use its
position in the UN Security Council to block their membership. I
believe in self-determination of peoples and I recognize that peoples
may wish to pursue statehood by different means. As we saw after the
Cold War, numerous new states were born out of the ruins of the USSR as
the various old Soviet Republics decided that smaller states were
preferable to an enormous and oppressive multi-national conglomerate.

The real, pro-US solution to the problems in the Middle East is for us
to end all foreign aid, stop arming foreign countries, encourage
peaceful diplomatic resolutions to conflicts, and disengage militarily.
In others words, follow Jefferson's admonition: "Peace, commerce, and
honest friendship with all nations, entangling alliances with none."
