---
title: The Nanny State Can't Last
author: Ron Paul
date: April 11, 2011

layout: default
---

Last week, Congress and the administration refused to seriously
consider the problem of government spending. Despite the
fear-mongering, a government shutdown would not have been as bad as
claimed.

It is encouraging that some in Washington seem to be insisting on
reduced spending, which is definitely a step in the right direction,
but only one step. We have miles to go before we can even come close to
a solution, and it will involve completely redefining the role of
government in our lives and on the world stage. A compromise was struck
at the last minute, but until Democrats agree to rein in entitlement
spending, and Republicans back off the blank checks to the military
industrial complex, it all amounts to political gamesmanship.

Unfortunately, the compromises always seem to be just the opposite.
Instead of the left agreeing to cut social spending and the right
agreeing to cut military spending, the right agrees to more welfare and
the left agrees to more warfare. In spite of all the rhetoric, we will
go deeper in debt, the Fed will print more money, and the value of the
dollar will continue to plummet. How long will it be before foreigners
stop buying our debt, and hyperinflation arrives? Throughout history,
empires have always overextended themselves through conquests and
wealth transfers leading to eventual collapse, from the Roman Empire to
the Soviet Union. We are headed in the same direction and it seems only
the chaos of the collapse of the dollar will stop the spending spree.
Arguing over funding for Planned Parenthood and NPR, though important,
only shows that leadership in Washington either won't face reality, or
don't understand how serious the problem is.

Of course, an actual government collapse would create serious problems
for many people who have come to depend on government payments for
healthcare, retirement income, their children's education, and even
food and housing. However, these so-called entitlement programs are
unconstitutional to begin with and have engendered a culture of
dependence on wealth transfer payments that is out of control. It
concerns me greatly that instead of dealing seriously with our
situation, so many in Washington would rather allow the chaos that will
ensue when all of the dependent people are suddenly cut off. Better to
look reality squarely in the face and tell people the difficult truth
that government is simply not capable of managing people's lives from
cradle to grave as was foolishly promised. We face trillions in
deficits with any of the budgets under consideration. Keeping those
promises is, sadly, just not one of our options in the long run. Better
to admit the nanny state is coming to an end and we are no longer
working on "compromises" but a transition - to a sustainable way of
life, one that respects the constitution, the rule of law and property
rights.
