---
title: Taking Executive Orders Too Far
author: Ron Paul
date: November 7, 2011

layout: default
---

These are frustrating times for the President. Having been swept into
office with a seemingly strong mandate, he enjoyed a Congress
controlled by members of his own party for the first two years of his
term. However, midterm elections brought gridlock and a close division
of power between the two parties. With a crucial re-election campaign
coming up, there is desperation in the president’s desire to "do
something" in spite of his severely weakened mandate.

Getting something done is proving to be a monumental task. This may be
news to the supposed constitutional scholar who is now our president,
but if the political process seems inconvenient to the implementation
of his agenda, that is not a flaw in the system. It was designed that
way. The drafters of the Constitution intended the default action of
government to be inaction. Hopefully, this means actions taken by the
government are necessary and proper. If federal laws or executive
actions can’t be agreed upon constitutionally- which is to say legally-
such laws or actions should be rejected.

The vision of the founders was to set up a government that would remain
small and unobtrusive via a system of checks and balances. That it has
taken our government so long to get this big speaks well of the
original design. The founders also knew the overwhelming nature of
governments was to amass power and grow. The Constitution was to serve
as the brakes on the freight train of government.

But the Obama administration, like so many administrations in the
20^th^ century, chooses to ignore the Constitution entirely. The
increasingly broad use and scope of the Executive Orders is a prime
example. Executive Orders are meant to be a way for the president to
direct executive agencies on the implementation of congressionally
approved legislation. It has become increasingly common for them to be
misused in ways that are contradictory to congressional intent, or to
bypass Congress altogether in enacting political agendas. The current
administration has unabashedly stated that Congress's unwillingness to
pass the president's jobs bill means that the president will act
unilaterally to enact provisions of it piecemeal through Executive
Order. Obama explicitly threatens to bypass Congress, thus aggregating
the power to make and enforce laws in the executive. This clearly
erodes the principles of separation of powers and checks and balances.
It brings the modern presidency dangerously close to an elective
dictatorship.

Of course, the most dangerous and costly overstepping of executive
authority is going to war without a congressional declaration. Congress
has been sadly complicit in this usurpation by ceding much of its
war-making authority to the executive because it wants to avoid taking
responsibility for major war decisions, but that is part of our job in
Congress! If the President cannot present to Congress and the people a
convincingly strong case for going to war, then perhaps we should keep
the nation at peace, rather than risk our men and women's lives for
ill-defined reasons!

This administration certainly was not the first to behave in ways that
have defied the Constitution to overstep its bounds. Sadly, previous
administrations have set precedents that the current administration is
only building upon. It is time for Congress to reassert itself and its
constitutional role so that future administrations cannot continue on
this dangerous path.
