---
title: The Pesky Neighbor and the Debt Ceiling
author: Ron Paul
date: July 25, 2011

layout: default
---

Imagine you had a pesky neighbor who somehow took out a mortgage on his
house in your name and by some legal trickery you were obligated to pay
for it. Imagine watching this neighbor throw drunken parties, buy
expensive cars, add more rooms to the house, and hire dozens of people
to wait on him hand and foot. Imagine that he also managed to take out
several credit cards in your name. One by one, he would max them out
and then use your good name and credit to obtain another credit card,
then another and then another. Each time, this neighbor would claim
that he needed the new credit card to pay interest on the other maxed
out credit cards. If he defaulted on those cards, your credit score
would be hurt and when you wanted to buy something for yourself, it
would be more difficult to get a loan and the interest you paid would
be higher. Imagine that you mulled this over, and time after time, said
nothing as he filled out more credit applications so he would not have
to default on the other debt taken out in your name. Meanwhile, another
shiny new Mercedes appears in his driveway. At what point do you think
you might get tired of this game? And, even though you are left with no
really good options, do you think you might eventually tell him to go
ahead and default, just stop spending your money!

This analogy demonstrates the position we are in with our government
and the debt ceiling. The government has run up a huge debt in the name
of the American people, who are sick and tired of being on the hook for
it. There are no really good options left. Defaulting on a portion of
the debt may not be without costs, but it is better than handing the
government yet another credit card.

The government is using the usual scare tactics to strong-arm the
people into going along with more spending. Remember the rhetoric
surrounding the big bailout of October 2008? We were told, not that
this would be calamitous for the banks, but for the people, who would
continue to experience massive job losses and foreclosures. We were
told that the economy would sink into a deep recession if this money
was not handed out to too-big-to-fail corporate cronies. So, after much
hand-wringing, leaders from both parties, against unprecedented public
outcry, agreed to shower money on the banks and increase the debt. The
banks learned nothing, except that Washington will come to their
rescue, no matter what. The people, however, continued to lose their
jobs and houses anyway, and here we are, still in a deep recession.

When you read the above example, your first reaction might have been to
dismiss the neighbor's debt as illegitimate and in no way your
responsibility or your problem. You would be right. No fair-minded
legal system would hold you responsible for such a debt, and would
instead cart your thieving neighbor off to jail. Yet Congress can
impose liabilities on you, your children, and grandchildren without
your consent, and even without your knowledge. This is another example
of government holding itself above the law. Much like the TSA claims
the right to molest us, yet arrested a woman who turned the tables last
week, stealing somehow becomes legitimate when the government does it.

We supposedly live in a nation of laws. For once, government needs to
heed the law regarding the debt ceiling.
