---
title: Our 30 Year Mistake
author: Ron Paul
date: February 7, 2011

layout: default
---

The events in Egypt of late have captured the attention of the world,
as many thousands of Egyptians take to the streets both in opposition
to and in favor of the current regime. We watch from a distance hoping
that events do not spiral further into violence, which will destroy
lives and threaten the livelihoods of average Egyptians caught up in
the political turmoil.

I hope that Egyptians are able to work toward a more free and just
society. Unfortunately, much of the blame for the unrest in Egypt and
the resulting instability in the region rests with US foreign policy
over the past several decades. The US government has sent more than
\$60 billion to the Egyptian regime since the Camp David Accords in
1978 to purchase stability, including more security for the state of
Israel. We see now the folly of our interventionist foreign policy: not
only has that stability fallen to pieces with the current unrest, but
the years of propping up the corrupt regime in Egypt has led the people
to increase their resentment of both America and Israel! We are both
worse off for decades of intervention into Egypt’s internal affairs. I
wish I could say that we have learned our lesson and will no longer
attempt to purchase – or rent – friends in the Middle East, but I am
afraid that is being too optimistic. Already we see evidence that while
the US historically propped up the Egyptian regime, we also provided
assistance to groups opposed to the regime.

So we have lost the credibility to claim today that we support the
self-determination of the Egyptian people. Our double dealing has not
endeared us to Egyptians who now seek to reclaim their independence and
national dignity.

"Diplomacy" via foreign aid transfer payments only makes us less safe
at home and less trusted overseas. But the overriding reality is that
we simply cannot afford to continue a policy of buying friends. We face
an ongoing and potentially deepening recession at home-- so how can we
justify to the unemployed and underemployed in the United States the
incredible cost of maintaining a global empire? Moral arguments aside,
we must stop sending hundreds of billions of dollars to foreign
governments when our own economy is in shambles.

American media and talking heads repeatedly pose the same loaded
questions: Should the administration encourage the Egyptian president
to remain or to resign? Should the US ensure Mohamed ElBaradei or
current vice president Omar Suleiman succeeds current president
Mubarak? The best answer to these questions is that we should just do
nothing, as Eisenhower did in 1956. We should leave Egypt for Egyptians
to figure out. Some may claim that this is isolationism. Nothing could
be further from the truth. We should enthusiastically engage in trade
and allow travel between countries, but we should stay out of their
internal affairs. We are in fact more isolated from Egypt now than
ever, because the regime we propped up appears to be falling. We have
isolated ourselves from the Egyptian people by propping up their
government, as we isolate ourselves from Tunisians, Israelis, and other
recipients of our foreign aid. Their resentment of our interventionist
policies makes us less safe, because we lose our authority to conduct
meaningful diplomacy when unpopular regimes fall overseas. We also
radicalize those who resented our support for past regimes.

Let us hope for a more prosperous and peaceful era for the Egyptians,
and let us learn the lessons of our thirty year Egyptian mistake.
