---
title: Central Economic Planning at its Worst
author: Ron Paul
date: February 21, 2011

layout: default
---

Last week, the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (FCIC) presented its
results to the Financial Services Committee. As with most other
politically-appointed commissions, the results of the FCIC's
investigation were easy to predict. Established by the same congress
that gave us national healthcare and with a majority of its members
appointed by those who seek to solve every problem with more government
intervention, it was no surprise that the commission's findings would
favor increased government intervention in the economy. Minority
members were not substantively involved in the commission's operations,
and the commission attempted to exclude their dissenting views by
granting them very limited space to do so.

However, even the minority members of the commission failed to consider
the most important cause of the financial crisis, namely the Federal
Reserve’s loose monetary policy. Almost a century ago, in 1912, Ludwig
von Mises published his great work The Theory of Money and Credit. This
was the first systematic description of Austrian Business Cycle Theory
(ABCT), which explains the origins of the business cycle in monetary
expansion. This theory explains why so many businessmen make so many of
the same errors at the same time. Yet not a single member of the
commission undertook an analysis of the financial crisis from an
Austrian economic viewpoint.

Instead, blame was placed on failures in financial regulation and
corporate governance, excessive borrowing and risky investments, and
expansion of subprime lending, among other factors. But none of these
explanations can answer why this crisis occurred. Why was there
excessive borrowing? Why was there an explosion of subprime lending?
Why were there failures in corporate governance? Why did virtually no
one except Austrian economists see this coming?

Without the Federal Reserve's massive expansion of credit throughout
the 1990s and early 2000s, there could have been no excessive borrowing
or explosion of subprime lending. Through easy credit, the Fed
initiated the economic boom that created the dot-com bubble. When that
bubble burst the Fed pumped additional liquidity into the system, which
led to a new boom that created the housing bubble. And now the Fed's
additional trillions of dollars in monetary pumping is creating yet
another bubble. This is the exact opposite of stability in the
marketplace and has nothing to do with free markets. It is central
economic planning at its worst.

It is imperative that the historic record accurately reflect what
actually happened. In the popular press we see columnists attempting to
blame the financial crisis on the "small-government," "free-market"
policies of President Bush. Hundreds of billions of dollars in stimulus
payments, a \$700 billion bailout program, and trillions of dollars of
Federal Reserve credit facilities hardly represent small-government and
free-market principles in action! On the contrary, these government
interventions by both major parties demonstrate quite clearly our
nation’s acceptance of crony capitalism.

Schoolchildren today are taught the myth that Herbert Hoover was a
small-government President who did nothing to stop the Depression,
while the truth is exactly the opposite. Fed Chairman Bernanke failed
to understand the true cause of the Great Depression, so his policy
prescriptions to combat the current crisis are understandably flawed.
Unless we confront and correct false economic rhetoric, truly
understand the causes of the economic crisis, and do away with our
loose monetary policy, we will find ourselves in ever more vicious
business cycles.
