---
title: Euro Crisis Destabilizing the Dollar
author: Ron Paul
date: December 5, 2011

layout: default
---

In response to pressure from Wall Street, the White House and central
banks in Europe, the Federal Reserve last week drastically cut interest
rates for currency swaps to benefit troubled European banks. This will
flood world markets with more dollars and will soon mean rising prices
for every American at the grocery store. This extra liquidity will
temporarily ease the cash crunch for irresponsible bankers, but in the
long run it will make the situation much worse for consumers all over
the world. Equities markets registered big gains at the news, but only
for a day. Make no mistake - this is not capitalism, and this is not
how a free market operates. In a free market, bankruptcies happen, even
to large banks. We must remember, free markets are the true and best
regulators of financial mismanagement.

By contrast, under our current form of special interest corporatism
certain businesses are granted too-big-to-fail status and are never
allowed to go bankrupt. They keep profits generated during the good
times generated by the Fed's monetary inflation, yet their losses are
socialized through inflationary bailouts. This means you and your
family eventually pay for the Fed's decisions because every dollar you
earn is worth less. Few people make the connection that they have
enriched bankers in Europe through doubling and tripling prices on
milk, eggs, gasoline, and clothing, but that is exactly what is
happening. The increased pace and size of these types of desperate
financial maneuvers means price inflation will hit sooner and far too
fast for wages to keep up. This is how the middle class gets wiped out,
as has happened so many times in the past when fiat money fails.

The Fed's latest actions in cooperating with foreign central banks to
undertake liquidity swaps of dollars for foreign currencies is just one
more reason why Congress needs enhanced power to oversee and audit the
Fed. Under current law Congress cannot examine these types of
arrangements. Those who would argue that auditing the Fed or these
agreements with central banks harms the Fed's independence should
reevaluate the Fed's supposed independence when the Fed bails out
Europe so soon after President Obama promised US assistance in
resolving the Euro crisis.

Rather than calming markets, these arrangements should indicate just
how frightened governments around the world are about the European
financial crisis. Central banks are grasping at straws, hoping that
flooding the world with money created out of thin air will somehow
resolve a crisis caused by uncontrolled government spending and
irresponsible debt issuance. But those governments and central banks
never grasp that it is their own monetary policies that allowed
European banks to become so wantonly overleveraged in the first place.
If those banks need liquidity, they should generate it the old
fashioned way: by attracting depositors. If they cannot do so, they
should be allowed to fail. Congress should not permit this type of
open-ended commitment on the part of the Fed, a commitment which could
easily cost American taxpayers trillions of dollars. These dollar swaps
are purely inflationary and will harm Americans as much as any form of
quantitative easing.

Americans deserve sound money that cannot be manipulated and created
out of thin air by central planners who deceitfully promise prosperity.
Fiat money caused this European crisis and the financial crisis before
it. More fiat money is not the cure. The global fiat currency system
has proven itself a failure. We need real monetary reform. We need
sound money.
