---
title: Overspending on National Security Threatens National Security
author: Ron Paul
date: February 20, 2012

layout: default
---

The administration recently released its 2013 budget proposal, and
conservatives are correctly alarmed that it calls for unprecedented
spending and continued annual deficits exceeding \$1 trillion. But the
same conservatives complain that the budget does not devote enough funds
to overseas adventurism.

I continue to be dismayed that in spite of our economic problems, most
of those who call themselves fiscal conservatives refuse to consider any
reductions in military spending. Doug Bandow of the Cato Institute very
aptly addresses this in his recent article for the American Conservative
entitled "Attack of the Pork Hawks". He points out that conservatives
are using a tired liberal argument to defend the bloated military
budget: namely, that more spending equals better results. The federal
education morass is merely one example that clearly disproves this.

The facts are that the President’s budget calls for an 18% increase
versus the previously planned 20% increase. This is not a cut, yet
Pentagon hawks continue to issue dire warnings that this "draconian"
decrease in proposed future spending will seriously threaten our
national security. In truth, the majority of DOD spending goes to
protect other nations, including prosperous allies like Europe and Japan
and South Korea - nations that could and should take more responsibility
for their own defense.

Is there any amount of money that would satisfy the hawks and the
neoconservatives? Even adjusted for inflation, military spending is 17%
higher now than when Obama took office. Even the worst case scenarios of
Obama's "cuts", adjusted for inflation, still put outlays at 2007
levels, which are 40% higher than a decade ago. Our total spending on
overseas adventurism and nation building equals more than the next 13
highest spending countries in the world combined. Even if we were to
slash our military budget in half, we would still be the world’s
dominant military power, by far.

In reality, the military industrial complex that President Eisenhower
warned us about has become every bit the voracious monolith he feared.
It wastes as much as any other arm of government, if not more, because
it knows it can depend on unlimited blank checks from a terrified
Congress.

Mr. Bandow concludes that America is more secure today than at any point
since before WWII, and that military outlays should be reduced
accordingly. We should, Mr. Bandow argues,

> "stop garrisoning the globe, subsidizing rich friends, and reconstructing poor enemies. Instead, it's about time Washington focused on defending American and its people."

I couldn't agree more. Wasting money on overseas adventurism and nation
building threatens our national security by massively contributing to
our debt. Both welfare and warfare spending are tipping our economy into
a serious currency and debt crisis. We can afford no sacred cows in our
budget. One only has to look to the violence and civil unrest in Greece
and ask - is that the sort of security we envision for our nation's
future?
