---
title: Professor Obama Gets an F
author: Ron Paul
date: April 16, 2012

layout: default
---

Last week President Obama made some rather shocking comments at a press
conference regarding the Supreme Court's deliberation on the
constitutionality of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, or
Obamacare. His comments belie a grasp of constitutional concepts so
lacking that perhaps the University of Chicago Law School should offer a
refund to any students "taught" constitutional law by then-Professor
Obama!

He said, "Ultimately, I'm confident that the Supreme Court will not take
what would be an unprecedented, extraordinary step of overturning a law
that was passed by a strong majority of a democratically elected
Congress."  It almost sounds as if he believes the test of
constitutionally is whether a majority approves of the bill, as opposed
to whether the legislation lies within one of the express powers of the
federal government. In fact, the very design of the Constitution, with
power split amongst two branches of the legislature which write the
laws, an executive who administers the laws, and an independent
judiciary which resolves disputes regarding meaning of the laws, was
designed to thwart popular will and preserve liberty.

President Obama continued in his comments, "For years, what we've heard
is the biggest problem on the bench was judicial activism or a lack of
judicial restraint, that an unelected group of people would somehow
overturn a duly constituted and passed law. Well, there's a good
example, and I'm pretty confident that this court will recognize that
and not take that step." 

President Obama seems to misunderstand that the criticism of an activist
judiciary is not that it is overturning unconstitutional federal laws,
but instead that it is usurping the authority to intervene in areas,
such as abortion, where the Constitution reserves authority to the
states. In fact, upholding clearly unconstitutional laws such as
Obamacare because the justices bowed to the "will of the people" or
believed the individual mandate was good social policy could be
considered an example of judicial activism.

The founders never intended the judiciary to have the last word on
whether or not a law is constitutional. The judiciary is equal to the
Congress and the President, not superior. Representatives, senators,
presidents, and judges all have an independent duty to determine a law's
constitutionality. The founders would be horrified by the attitude of
many lawmakers that they can pass whatever laws they want and federal
judges will then determine whether or not the law is constitutional.

Additionally, state governments have the authority to protect their
citizens from federal laws that threaten liberty. If the Supreme Court
rules that Obamacare is constitutional, I hope state legislators will
exercise their powers to pass legislation allowing their citizens to
opt-out of the national health care plan.

Unfortunately, even many of my colleagues who correctly argue
Obamacare's unconstitutionality support the President when he asserts
the power to send troops into battle without a declaration of war, or
have citizens indefinitely detained and even assassinated on little more
than his own authority. Other of my colleagues not only cheer the
unconstitutional monstrosity of Obamacare, but support the President's
actions to defy the Senate's appointment powers, and legislate by
executive order.

Even worse, some members will only challenge a President's
unconstitutional actions if the President is from a different political
party. The defeat of Obamacare in the courts would provide a stark
reminder that the limits of government are set by the Constitution, not
the will of the President, Congress, or even the Supreme Court. However,
the victory would be short lived as long as the legislative branch
refuses to do its duty to abide by the Constitutional limits and
exercises its powers to ensure the other two branches do likewise.
