---
title: EPA Abuses
author: Ron Paul
date: January 16, 2012

layout: default
---

Last week the Supreme Court heard arguments in Sackett v. EPA, a case of
blatant federal agency overreach and abuse of private property rights. 
Without any proof or reason, and no chance for appeal, the Environmental
Protection Agency determined that a small single home lot was a
"protected wetland." The owners, Mike and Chantell Sackett, were ordered
to halt construction already underway, to remove all of the work already
done, and plant trees and shrubs consistent with a wetlands
environment.  After making these costly changes, the Sackets then would
have to wait several years for the EPA to decide if they would be
allowed the use of their own property.  Refusal to comply with these
outrageous and arbitrary commandments would result in daily fines
greater than the value of the property!

Outraged, the Sacketts sought relief through the courts, but court after
court determined that they had no standing. The actions of the EPA were
not subject to judicial review until a mountain of fees had already been
assessed.   This is just another example not only of how federal
agencies wield enormous power over average citizens, but also how little
practical protection our court system provides when such citizens are
harmed by those agencies.

Constitutionally, when the government determines private property is
needed for public use, it is taken through eminent domain.  In that
process the owner is due fair market value in compensation for any
condemned property.  The EPA not only refuses to compensate the Sacketts
for effectively taking their land, they are assessing-- or threatening
to assess-- ruinous penalties that greatly exceed the value of the
land.  They arrogantly claim the power to determine how certain property
owners can use their land, while assessing fines or ordering actions
that must be undertaken at the property ownerâ€™s expense.  All of this is
done at the administrative level, with no judicial oversight.  In short,
the EPA does not believe the Constitution applies to them.

A decision on this case is expected this summer.  My fervent hope is
that the Supreme Court will thwart this rogue agency and stand up for
property rights and the right of people to have their day in court when
they find themselves unwittingly accosted by the EPA.\
My own district in Texas is no stranger to these issues.  Again, with no
evidence to support their decision, the EPA arbitrarily determined
Matagorda County to be an "Ozone Nonattainment Region", meaning the air
quality is substandard.  In fact, the population in this county has been
decreasing and the small amount of emissions reported from Matagorda
County has actually declined in recent years.  The Texas agency charged
with environmental protection disagrees with the EPA.  Yet Matagorda
County, like the Sacketts, finds itself at the mercy of the EPA.  New
business and construction will be stymied until the Washington masters
are satisfied.

Unless Congress acts, EPA bureaucrats will continue to inflict
potentially devastating economic consequences on communities like
Matagorda County and people like the Sacketts.  Destroying the economy
is no way to save the environment.  A thriving economy and a fair
judicial system that respects property rights and the Constitution
provide the best protection of the environment.
