---
title: The Economics of Disaster
author: Ron Paul
date: November 5, 2012

layout: default
---

Hurricane Sandy was one of the worst natural disasters the east coast
has ever seen.  Clean-up and recovery will take months, if not years and
estimates run in the tens of billions of dollars.  Parts of New York and
New Jersey will never be the same.  Entire seashore communities have
been wiped out, but the determination to rebuild has been lauded as
courageous and admirable. Yet as with all natural disasters, Sandy
raises uncomfortable questions about the extent to which taxpayers
should fund the cleanup and the extent to which government programs
create moral hazards.

For example, FEMA and the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) are
expected to pick up the tab for much of the flood damage caused by the
hurricane.  Of course this will mean more federal debt and inflation for
the rest of us, since the program only has about [\$4 billion to work
with](http://www.mcclatchydc.com/2012/11/01/173365/few-in-the-northeast-have-federal.html?storylink=MI_emailed)
and is already [\$18 billion in debt](http://www.thenewsguard.com/news/article_434053cc-24a4-11e2-b18a-0019bb2963f4.html)
from hurricanes Katrina and Rita.  Many think there is a need for the
government to provide flood insurance of this kind.  After all, the
market would never provide insurance in flood prone areas at an
affordable price.  But shouldn't that tell us something?

Shouldn't that tell us that it is a losing proposition to insure homes
in coastal areas and flood plains often threatened by severe and
destructive weather patterns? And if it’s a losing proposition, should
taxpayers subsidize the inevitable losses arising from federal flood
insurance?

The NFIP [disguises the real cost of flood
insurance](http://mises.org/daily/1908) in flood prone areas, which
influences homebuilding and sales in such areas.  Recklessly taking
unwise risks when risk is underpriced is known as [moral
hazard](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moral_hazard).  When politicians
decide that private insurance premiums are too high, as with houses
built in flood plains, the solution is to under price the risk through
federal subsidies.  The obvious and expected outcome is more danger to
life and limb when disaster strikes. 

Even NFIP has been forced to raise rates significantly in coastal areas,
and is now [dropping second
homes](http://www.thenewsguard.com/news/article_434053cc-24a4-11e2-b18a-0019bb2963f4.html)
from coverage altogether.

Many assume it is compassionate to entrust government central planners
with disaster recovery.  However, the greatest compassion brings
results, not just good intentions.  And we’ve seen how bureaucratic
organizations like FEMA [mismanaged
recovery](http://paul.house.gov/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=1907&Itemid=69)
and relief in the wake of hurricanes Katrina and Ike.  Organizations
such as the Red Cross and [private companies like Home
Depot](http://lifeinc.today.com/_news/2012/11/02/14859796-companies-step-up-to-help-victims-of-sandy?lite)
and Duracell have already stepped in admirably to help those in need,
and we can only hope FEMA has learned this time not to impede and
frustrate private efforts as they have in the past.

Above all, my thoughts and prayers are with the victims of Hurricane
Sandy in this tremendously difficult time and hope they can get their
lives put back together as quickly and seamlessly as possible.
