---
title: Economy Squeezed As Debt Accelerates
author: Ron Paul
date: February 27, 2012

layout: default
---

Senator Jeff Sessions, ranking member of the Senate Budget Committee has
pointed out that our per capita government debt is already larger than
Greece's.  Per person, our government owes over \$49,000 compared to
\$38,937 per Greek citizen.  Our debt has just reached 101% of our Gross
Domestic Product.  Our creditors see this and have quietly slowed down
or stopped their lending to us.  As a result, the Federal Reserve has
been outright monetizing debt as a way to patch things together and keep
the economy on life support a little longer.  There is rapidly shrinking
demand for our debt, and confidence in the dollar is falling.  This
phenomenon is hidden only by the fact that confidence in all other fiat
currencies is falling faster.

None of this seems to really alarm the administration, obviously, as
they have just released a budget that accelerates spending and
borrowing.  The reason the debt and deficits plague the economy,
according to this administration, is that the American economy is not
taxed enough.  Therefore, hidden in the fine print of the budget is a
provision that ramps up the corporate dividends tax rate from its
current 15% to 39.6%.  In addition, certain deductions and exemptions
will be phased out; an additional 3.8% Obamacare investment tax
surcharge will be tacked on, bringing the effective dividend tax rate to
44.8% in 2013.  Keep in mind, this is not just a tax on big business,
this is a tax on anyone who depends on dividend income to live -
retirees will be hit hard by these changes and dividend yielding stock
prices will adjust downward rapidly to reflect their decreased value.

Not only this, but the Obama administration is worsening the uniquely
American policy of taxing income of US based companies earned overseas. 
No other country presumes to tax globally in this manner, so it amounts
to a huge penalty for basing a company in the US.  Companies have been
able to manage this penalty by deferring taxation until it is
repatriated or by paying dividends.  What will happen to US based
businesses with strong international ties if these allowances are
abolished as the Obama administration proposes?  A massive wave of
permanent capital flight will undoubtedly cause the already high levels
of unemployment to rise.

Businesses are struggling and failing in this economy.  The government
ultimately depends on a healthy business climate to provide jobs and a
tax base.  It is penny wise and pound foolish to add to business tax
burden in a misguided attempt to close the colossal gap between our
government's revenue and spending. Rather than crippling and absorbing
more of our shrinking economy, government needs to be drastically cut -
not in 10 years, but immediately.

Those who understand the underpinnings of the dollar and how the Federal
Reserve works have known for some time that we are on an unsustainable
course, that major chaos is in store if nothing is done quickly to
reform things.  Politicians pay lip-service to reforms that never
materialize or turn out to be at best small and meaningless, or at worst
actively harmful.  It seems more and more inevitable that because the
necessary changes would be too inconvenient for the elites to enact now,
we will get them later Greek-style, through collapse and chaos.
