---
title: Headed Toward the 11th Hour Compromise
author: Ron Paul
date: December 3, 2012

layout: default
---


As the year draws to an end, America faces yet another
Congressionally-manufactured crisis which will likely end in yet another 11th
hour compromise, resulting in more government growth touted as "saving" the
economy. While cutting taxes is always a good idea, setting up a ticking time
bomb with a sunset provision, as the Bush tax cuts did, is terrible policy.
Congress should have just cut taxes. But instead, we have a crisis that is sure
not to go to waste.

The hysteria surrounding the January 1 deadline for the Budget Control Act’s
spending cuts and expiration of the Bush tax cuts seems all too familiar. Even
the language is predictably hysterical: if government reduces planned spending
increases by even a tiny amount, the economy will go over a "fiscal cliff."
This is nonsense.

This rhetoric is based on the belief that government spending sustains the
economy, when in fact the opposite is true. Every dollar the government spends
is a dollar taken from consumers, businessmen, or investors. Reducing spending
can only help the economy by putting money back in the hands of ordinary
Americans. Politicians who claim to support the free market and the lower and
middle-class should take this to heart.

The reality is, however, that neither Republicans nor Democrats are serious
about cutting spending. Even though U.S. military spending is exponentially
larger than any other country and is notorious for its inefficiency and cost
overruns, Republicans cannot seem to stomach even one penny of cuts to the
Pentagon’s budget. This is unfortunate because this is the easiest, most
obvious place to start getting spending under control. The military-industrial
complex and unconstitutional overseas military interventions should be the
first place we look for budget cuts.

Similarly, Democrats are digging in their heels on not cutting any welfare or
entitlement spending and instead propose to fix the deficit by raising taxes on
the rich, even though the U.S. Government already has a progressive tax code
and the rich already pay more than their fair share. Furthermore, these higher
taxes would fall on small business owners, investors, and entrepreneurs—in
other words, the source of economic growth and new jobs!

The truth is that there is no excuse for government spending being as high as
it is, nor for taxes being as high as they are. Even the God of the Old
Testament only asked for 10% as a tithe and offering, and Americans revolted
against the King of England for taxes that amounted to less than five percent.
Yet so many people today complain about "loopholes" for the rich that lower
their actual tax rate to "only" 13% in some instances. Even that is a criminal
amount to pay for a wasteful, abusive, unconstitutional government.

We are indeed headed to a fiscal cliff and have been long before this latest
hysteria cropped up. But it is not cuts to spending or reduced government
"revenue" that will send us over the cliff, it is continued government spending
that will. Until the federal government limits itself to its
Constitutionally-mandated role, spending and taxation will remain out of
control.

Look for a "bipartisan" compromise in late December, with Republicans giving in
to tax increases and settling for phony spending cuts that actually grow
government, and Democrats caving on defense cuts in exchange for tax increases.
This is how the government has always grown: both sides will sacrifice their
pro-liberty, small government stances in certain areas in order to grow the
government where they prefer.

Liberty always loses in the 11th hour.
