---
title: Expanding Covert Warfare Makes Us Less Safe
author: Ron Paul 
date: December 10, 2012

layout: default
---

Earlier this month we learned that the Obama Administration is significantly
expanding the number of covert Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) agents
overseas. From just a few hundred DIA agents overseas today, the administration
intends to eventually deploy some 1,600 covert agents. The nature of their work
will also shift, away from intelligence collection and more toward covert
actions. This move signals a major change in how the administration intends to
conduct military and paramilitary operations overseas. Unfortunately it is not
a shift toward peace, but rather to an even more deadly and disturbing phase in
the "war on terror."

Surely attacks on foreign countries will increase as a result of this move, but
more and more the strikes will take place under cover of darkness and outside
the knowledge of Congress or the American people. The move also represents a
further blurring of the lines between the military and intelligence services,
with the CIA becoming more like a secret military unto itself. This is a very
troubling development.

In 2010, I said in a speech that there had been a CIA coup in this country. The
CIA runs the military, the drone program, and they are in drug trafficking. The
CIA is a secretive government all on its own. With this new expanded Defense
Intelligence Agency presence overseas it will be even worse. Because the DIA is
operationally under control of the Pentagon, direct Congressional oversight of
the program will be more difficult. Perhaps this is as intended. The CIA will
be training the DIA in its facilities to conduct operations overseas. Much of
this will include developing targeting data for the president’s expanding drone
warfare program.

Already the president has demonstrated his preference for ever more drone
attacks overseas. In Pakistan, for example, President Obama has in his first
four years authorized six times more drone strikes than under all eight years
of the Bush Administration. Nearly three thousand individuals have been killed
by these drones, many of those non-combatants.

President Obama said recently of Israel’s strikes against the Palestinians in
Gaza, "No country on Earth would tolerate missiles raining down on its citizens
from outside its borders." This announcement by the administration amounts to
precisely that: the US intends to rain down ever more missiles on citizens
overseas. I believe what the president says about Israel is true everywhere, so
what about those overseas who live in fear of our raining missiles? How will
they feel about the United States? Is it not possible that we may be inviting
more blowback by expanding the covert war overseas? Does that make us safer?

An exhaustive study earlier this year by Stanford and New YorkUniversity law
schools found that US drone strikes on Pakistan are "damaging and
counterproductive," potentially creating more terrorists than they kill. Its
recommendations of a radical re-appraisal of the program obviously fell on deaf
ears in the administration.

Thousands of new DIA spies are to be hired and placed undercover alongside
their CIA counterparts to help foment ever more covert wars and coups in
foreign lands. Congress is silent. Where will it all end?
