---
title: CISPA is the New SOPA
author: Ron Paul
date: April 23, 2012

layout: default
---

Earlier this year, strong public opposition led by several prominent
websites forced Congressional leaders to cancel votes on two bills known
in Washington as "SOPA" and "PIPA."  Both of these bills threatened
search engines and websites with possible shutdowns if the Justice
Department deemed them insufficiently cooperative with our phony "war on
terror," or if they were merely accused of copyright infringement. 
Fortunately the American public flooded Capitol Hill with phone calls
and Congressional leaders dropped both bills.

But we should never underestimate the federal governmentâ€™s insatiable
desire to control the internet.  Statists of all parties, persuasions,
and nationalities hate the free, unbridled flow of information, ideas,
and goods via the internet.  They resent the notion that ordinary people
can communicate and trade across the world without government filters or
approvals.  So they continually seek to impose controls, always under
the guise of fighting terrorism or protecting "intellectual property"
rights.

The latest assault on internet freedom is called the "Cyber Intelligence
Sharing and Protection Act," or "CISPA," which may be considered by
Congress this week.  CISPA is essentially an internet monitoring bill
that permits both the federal government and private companies to view
your private online communications with no judicial oversight--provided,
of course, that they do so in the name of "cybersecurity."  The bill is
very broadly written, and allows the Department of Homeland Security to
obtain large swaths of personal information contained in your emails or
other online communication.  It also allows emails and private
information found online to be used for purposes far beyond any
reasonable definition of fighting cyberterrorism.

CISPA represents an alarming form of corporatism, as it further
intertwines government with companies like Google and Facebook.  It
permits them to hand over your private communications to government
officials without a warrant, circumventing well-established federal laws
like the Wiretap Act and the Electronic Communications Privacy Act.  It
also grants them broad immunity from lawsuits for doing so, leaving you
without recourse for invasions of privacy.  Simply put, CISPA encourages
some of our most successful internet companies to act as government
spies, sowing distrust of social media and chilling communication in one
segment of the world economy where America still leads.

Proponents of CISPA may be well-intentioned, but they unquestionably are
leading us toward a national security state rather than a free
constitutional republic.  Imagine having government-approved employees
embedded at Facebook, complete with federal security clearances, serving
as conduits for secret information about their American customers.  If
you believe in privacy and free markets, you should be deeply concerned
about the proposed marriage of government intelligence gathering with
private, profit-seeking companies.  CISPA is Big Brother writ large,
putting the resources of private industry to work for the nefarious
purpose of spying on the American people.We can only hope the public
responds to CISPA as it did to SOPA back in January.  I urge you to
learn more about the bill by reading a synopsis provided by the
Electronic Frontier Foundation on their website at eff.org.  I also urge
you to call your federal Senators and Representatives and urge them to
oppose CISPA and similar bills that attack internet freedom.
