---
title: A Republic, Not a Democracy
author: Ron Paul
date: September 10, 2012

layout: default
---

Last week marked the conclusion of the grand taxpayer funded spectacles
known as the national party conventions.  It is perhaps very telling
that while [\$18 million in tax
dollars](http://j.mp/U4bFtU) was granted to each
party for these lavish ordeals, an [additional \$50
million](http://j.mp/U4bDm1)each was
needed for security in anticipation of the inevitable protests at each
event.  This amounts to a total of \$136 million in taxpayer funds for
strictly partisan activities - a drop in the bucket relative to our
disastrous fiscal situation, but disgraceful nonetheless.  Parties
should fund their own parties, not the taxpayer.

At these conventions, leaders determined, or pretended to determine, who
they wished to govern the nation for the next four years amidst
inevitable, endless exaltations of democracy.  Yet we are not a
democracy.  In fact, the founding fathers found the concept of democracy
very dangerous.

Democracy is majority rule at the expense of the minority.  Our system
has certain democratic elements, but the founders never mentioned
democracy in the Constitution, the Bill of Rights, or the Declaration of
Independence.  In fact, our most important protections are decidedly
undemocratic.  For example, the First Amendment protects free speech. 
It doesn't - or shouldn't - matter if that speech is abhorrent to 51% or
even 99% of the people.  Speech is not subject to majority approval. 
Under our republican form of government, the individual, the smallest of
minorities, is protected from the mob. 

Sadly, the constitution and its protections are respected less and less
as we have quietly allowed our constitutional republic to devolve into a
militarist, corporatist social democracy.  Laws are broken, quietly
changed and ignored when inconvenient to those in power, while others in
positions to check and balance do nothing.  The protections the founders
put in place are more and more just an illusion. 

This is why increasing importance is placed on the beliefs and views of
the president.  The very narrow limitations on government power are
clearly laid out in Article 1 Section 8 of the Constitution.  Nowhere is
there any reference to being able to force Americans to buy health
insurance or face a tax/penalty, for example.  Yet this power has been
claimed by the executive and astonishingly affirmed by Congress and the
Supreme Court.  Because we are a constitutional republic, the mere
popularity of a policy should not matter.  If it is in clear violation
of the limits of government and the people still want it, a
Constitutional amendment is the only appropriate way to proceed.
 However, rather than going through this arduous process, the
Constitution was in effect, ignored and the insurance mandate was
allowed anyway.

This demonstrates how there is now a great deal of unhindered
flexibility in the Oval Office to impose personal views and preferences
on the country, so long as 51% of the people can be convinced to vote a
certain way.  The other 49% on the other hand have much to be angry
about and protest under this system.

We should not tolerate the fact that we have become a nation ruled by
men, their whims and the mood of the day, and not laws.  It cannot be
emphasized enough that we are a republic, not a democracy and, as such,
we should insist that the framework of the Constitution be respected and
boundaries set by law are not crossed by our leaders.  These legal
limitations on government assure that other men do not impose their will
over the individual, rather, the individual is able to govern himself.  
When government is restrained, liberty thrives.
