---
title: Interest Rates Are Prices
author: Ron Paul
date: September 24, 2012

layout: default
---

One of the most enduring myths in the United States is that this country
has a free market, when in reality, the market is merely the structural
shell of formerly free institutions.  Government pulls the strings
behind the scenes.  No better illustration of this can be found than in
the Federal Reserve's manipulation of interest rates.

The Fed has interfered with the proper function of interest rates for
decades, but perhaps never as boldly as it has in the past few years
through its policies of quantitative easing.  In Chairman Bernanke's
most recent press conference he stated that the Fed wishes not only to
drive down rates on Treasury debt, but also rates on mortgages,
corporate bonds, and other important interest rates.  Markets greeted
this statement enthusiastically, as this means trillions more
newly-created dollars flowing directly to Wall Street.

Because the interest rate is the price of money, manipulation of
interest rates has the same effect in the market for loanable funds as
price controls have in markets for goods and services. Since demand for
funds has increased, but the supply is not being increased, the only way
to match the shortfall is to continue to create new credit. But this
process cannot continue indefinitely. At some point the capital projects
funded by the new credit are completed. Houses must be sold, mines must
begin to produce ore, factories must begin to operate and produce
consumer goods.

But because consumption patterns have either remained unchanged or have
become more present-oriented, by the time these new capital projects are
finished and begin to produce, the producers find no market for their
goods. Because the coordination between savings and consumption was
severed through the artificial lowering of the interest rate, both
savers and borrowers have been signaled into unsustainable patterns of
economic activity. Resources that would have been used in productive
endeavors under a regime of market-determined interest rates are instead
shuttled into endeavors that only after the fact are determined to be
unprofitable.  In order to return to a functioning economy, those
resources which have been malinvested need to be liquidated and shifted
into sectors in which they can be put to productive use.  

Another effect of the injections of credit into the system is that
prices rise.  More money chasing the same amount of goods results in a
rise in prices.  Wall Street and the banking system gain the use of the
new credit before prices rise.  Main Street, however, sees the prices
rise before they are able to take advantage of the newly-created credit.
The purchasing power of the dollar is eroded and the standard of living
of the American people drops.

We live today not in a free market economic system but in a "mixed
economy", marked by an uneasy mixture of corporatism; vestiges of free
market capitalism; and outright central planning in some sectors.  Each
infusion of credit by the Fed distorts the structure of the economy,
damages the important role that interest rates play in the market, and
erodes the purchasing power of the dollar.  Fed policymakers view
themselves as wise gurus managing the economy, yet every action they
take results in economic distortion and devastation. 

Unless Congress gets serious about reining in the Federal Reserve and
putting an end to its manipulation, the economic distortions the Fed has
caused will not be liquidated; they will become more entrenched, keeping
true economic recovery out of our grasp and sowing the seeds for future
crisis.
